
[Transcriber’s Note:

This text uses utf-8 (unicode) file encoding. If the apostrophes and
quotation marks in this paragraph appear as garbage, make sure your
text reader’s “character set” or “file encoding” is set to Unicode
(UTF-8). You may also need to change the default font. As a last
resort, use the latin-1 version of the file instead.

Words shown in +marks+ were printed in blackletter (“gothic”) type.
Spelling, punctuation and capitalization-- including the variation
between W and VV-- are as in the original. Errors are listed at the
end of the text.

The chapter on “Ringing” almost certainly contains undetected
typographical errors. Readers interested in solid information may
prefer _Tintinnalogia_ (1671), Project Gutenberg e-text 18567.]




  [Illustration:
  The School of Recreation.
  Printed for Henry Rodes near Bride Lane in Fleet Street.]




                      The
                     SCHOOL
                       of
                 +RECREATION:+

                    Or, The
                  Gentlemans
                     TUTOR,

                    To those
            Most Ingenious Exercises

                       of

          Hunting.       } { Fishing.
          Racing.        } { Shooting.
          Hawking.       } { Bowling.
          Riding.        } { Tennis.
          Cock-Fighting. } { Ringing.
          Fowling.       } { Billiards.

                    By R. H.

    _London_, Printed for _H. Rodes_,
    next door to the _Bear-Tavern_
    near _Bride-Lane_ in _Fleet-Street_, 1684.




TO THE READER.


_Man, the Abridgement of the Creation, or the _Compendium_ of all Gods
Works, having divested himself by Sin of that Original Innocence and
Angelical State of Life wherein his Creator had placed him, and thereby
Subjected his collapsed Nature to the Malediction of God, _In the sweat
of thy Face thou shalt eat thy Bread_, &c. It pleased however the
Almighty to continue and confirm that Original grand _Charter_ he had at
first granted him, of being _Lord of the Creatures_: Hereby intimating,
That tho man is now _Born to Trouble, Labour _and Cares_, as the Sparks
fly upward_; yet God has not deprived him of any Comfort or Felicity,
which the Earth or Creatures of it can afford; but has invested him with
a superior Authority and _Dominion over the Beast of the Feild, the Fowl
of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea_. Thus it comes to pass, that every
Creature payes a _Duty and a Subjection_, (as it were) to man, as to
their _Master_; and notwithstanding the Ferocity and Salvageness of
their Natures, become tame and submissive to the _Empire_ of Man. They
court his Favour and mutely supplicate his Friendship and Confederacy,
for the subduing the Enemies of their several _Species_: They readily
obey his Precepts, and ravisht with his Service willingly execute his
Commands. And thus by this prime Priviledg from God, Man is allowed the
Liberty of subduing the Creature, and recreating his Mind by _Hunting,
Fowling, Fishing_ and the like; and by observing the Natural _Instincts_
of every Species, the innate _Enmity and Cunning_ of every Creature, may
glorify the Immense Wisdom of his Creator._

_And as the Liberty of Recreation in lawful Exercises is thus
_Naturall_, so is it highly _Necessary_ and Useful too. Recreation keeps
up the strength and Alacrity of the bodily Forces, without which the
Soul cannot work: I mean those brisk and violent Exercises, which the
Following sheets specifie. They cause the Body to _transpire_ plentiful
sweats, and exhale those black and fuliginous Vapours which too much
oppress some men, and remove the Obstructions which hinder the
Circulation of Nature. _Brisk Exercises_ render a man Active, Vigorous,
Strong, and Hardy, and attenuate and disperse that _Stagnation_ of
humors, Benummedness and Dulness, which _Idleness_ contracts: Nay, (as
one excellently observes) divers bodily Infirmities, Diseases and
Undecencies are hereby regulated and amended: _Riding_ was used by the
great _Drusus_ for the Strengthening his weak and small Thighs and Legs;
and by his late _Majesty_, especially after Dinner; and is also good for
the Head: _Shooting in a long Bow_ for the Breast and Arms; and helps
Squinting: _Bowling_ for the Reins, Stone, Gravel, &c._

_Nor are the several other _Games_ commonly practised, less
_Commendable_, were they used with a _modest_ and _prudent_ Care:
I recomend them as useful as the other, were a _right use_ made of them.
I would not have them made a _Trade_, instead of a _Divertisement_. But
especially those that are managed by _Skill_, and not Fortune, may be
Learned, for these acquaint a man with _Numbring_, and quicken the Fancy
and Memory, and recreate the Mind._

_And as Recreation is thus natural and necessary, so is it _Commendable_
too, and recommended by the Practises of all Ages; as well sacred as
prophane Histories plainly testifying the Truth of it. But I shall not
trouble you any longer by detaining you at the Door, and enumerating the
various _Examples_, which may Authorize a vertuous Use of Recreations,
and apologize for this Work: The severest _Stoick_ being never so cruel
to himself or Nature, as not to give his mind some _Relaxation_, and
recreate it in some more pleasant Pathes, than the miry heavy wayes of
his own sullen and wilful _Resolutions_. Nor do our _Modern Stoicks_,
tho of the strictest Lives, deny themselves some _Mental_, if not bodily
Recreations; altho perhaps _Infirmity_, _Age_, _Station_, _Degree_, may
render their Divertisements the more _private_, yet not totally denyed.
_Solomon_ had his _Ittan_ for Recreations, as _Josephus_ informes us,
and the _Heathen_ Sages their _Olympiques_, wherein were exercised,
_Wrestling_, _Running_ with _Horses_, _Leaping_, _Coursing_ with
_Chariots_, _Contention of Poets_, _Rhetoricians_, _Disputations of
Phylosophers_, &c._

_And because _Velle suum cuique_, every Mans Nature claimes a special
Prerogative, in the electing a Recreation _Suitable_ to it self, one
thing being very pleasing and delightful to one, and offensive and
troublesome to another, I have therefore like the industrious _Bee_
gathered _Honey_ from various _Flowers_, and according to your _Palate_
taste and Eat; I have carefully _Delineated_ and drawn to the Life the
divers _Figures_ of the several Recreations, and leave you to admire
that _Peice_ you fancy best; intreating you to put them to the best
_Use_, not to make them your Trade instead of _Recreation_; in which
sence I would have you to accept this: And now you may walk in and view
the Structure._




OF

Hunting.


_Hunting_, being a Recreation that challenges the sublime Epithets of
_Royal_, _Artificial_, _Manly_, and _Warlike_, for its Stateliness,
Cunning, and Indurance, claims above all other Sports the Precedency;
and therefore I was induced to place it at the Head to usher in the
rest; and of which take this concise Definition, _viz._ That since
Nature has equally imparted unto every Beast a wonderful Knowledge of
_Offence_ and _Security_, herein we may observe, _The curious Search and
Conquest of one Creature over another, hurried on by an innate natural
Antipathy, and performed or wrought by a Distinction of Smells._

And now to come to the Purpose, and the Design of this Tract, briefly to
inform the young _Hunter_, as yet raw in the true Knowledge of this
_Royal Sport_, with what is meerly _necessary_ and _useful_, without
amusing him with _superfluous_ Observations for his Instruction: I shall
therefore observe throughout this Treatise this Method: 1. The several
_Chases_ or _Games_ which fall under the first Denomination, _Hunting_.
2. The genuine or infallible _Rules_ whereby we are to direct our
selves, for the obtaining the true Pleasure in prosecuting the same, and
the desired Effects of it.

Know then; There are five _Beasts of Venery_ or _Forest_, viz. The
_Hart_, _Hinde_, _Hare_, _Boar_, _Wolf_.

As likewise five Wild Beasts, or _Beasts of Chace_, viz. The _Buck_,
_Doe_, _Fox_, _Martern_, _Roe_.

The _Beasts of Warren_, are three, _viz._ _Hares_, _Coneys_, _Roes_.

_Note_, The _Hart_ and _Hinde_ before spoken of, though they are of
_one_ kind, yet, because their _Seasons_ are several, are esteemed
_distinct_ Beasts; and in the _Hart_ is included the _Stag_, and all
_red Deer_ of Antlier.

And because I reckon it the most necessary part of the _Hunter_ to
understand the _Names_, _Degrees_, _Ages_, and _Seasons_ of the
aforesaid different Beasts of _Forest_ or _Venery_, _Chace_, and
_Warren_; I shall therefore, in the next place, present him with these
following


_Beasts of Forrest_, &c.

The _Hart_, the first Year is called a _Hinde-Calf_, 2 A _Knobber_, 3 A
_Brock_, 4 A _Staggard_, 5 A _Stagg_, 6 A _Hart_.

The _Hinde_, the first Year a _Calf_, 2 A _Hearse_, 3 A _Hinde_.

The _Hare_, the first Year a _Leveret_, 2 A _Hare_, 3 A _Great Hare_.

The _Wild-Boar_ and _Woolf_, being no _English_ Chace, I omit.


_Beasts of Chace._

The _Buck_, the first Year is called a _Fawn_, 2 A _Pricket_, 3 A
_Sorrel_, 4 A _Sore_, 5 A _Buck of the first Head_, 6 A _Great Buck_.

The _Doe_, the first Year a _Fawn_, 2 A _Teg_, 3 A _Doe_.

The _Fox_, the first Year a _Cub_, 2 A _Fox_.

The _Martern_, the first Year a _Cub_, 2 A _Martern_.

The _Roe_, the first Year a _Kid_, 2 A _Gyrl_, 3 a _Hemuse_, 4 A
_Roe-Buck of the first Head_, 5 A _Fair Roe-Buck_.

As for the _Beasts of Warren_, the _Hare_ being spoken of before, little
or nothing is to be said. The _Coney_ is first a _Rabbet_, and then an
_Old Coney_.

Thus much for their Names, Degrees, and Ages: Now let us next observe
their _proper Seasons_ for Hunting.

The _Hart_ or _Buck_, beginneth _fifteen_ Days after _Mid-Summer-Day_,
and lasteth till _Holy-Rood-Day_.

The _Fox_, from _Christmass_, and lasteth till the _Annunciation of the
blessed Virgin Mary_.

The _Hinde_, or _Doe_, from _Holy-Rood-Day_, till _Candlemas_.

The _Roe-Buck_, from _Easter_, till _Michaelmas_.

The _Roe_, from _Michaelmas_, till _Candlemas_.

The _Hare_, from _Michaelmas_, to the end of _February_.

Thus much I thought fit to speak briefly of the proper _Names_,
_Degrees_, _Ages_, & _Seasons_ of the several Chaces which we Hunt: But
having almost forgot some, I shall insert here, as intending to speak
somewhat of them, and they are the _Badger_, _Otter_, and _Wild-Goat_;
the last being a _Welch_-Game: Many more there are which I might here
enumerate, but being _Forreign_ Chaces, I omit, as directing my
Discourse to the _English-Man_.

As for the _Terms of Art_ appropriated to Hunting, as the Huntsmans
_Dialect_, they are so many and various, that should I go about to note
them here, it would swell my Treatise to too big a Volume; and therefore
I refer you to the _Dictionaries_ which speak of them. And now I bring
you to the second thing I proposed, _viz._ The _Rules And Measures_ we
are to learn and observe in the aforementioned Sports or Chaces; and in
this we must begin with the _Pursuers or Conquerors_ of these Chaces,
namely;


_Of Hounds._

There are several kinds of _Hounds_, endued with Qualities suitable to
the Country where they are bred; and therefore consult his _Country_,
and you will soon understand his _Nature_ & _Use_: As for instance, The
_Western_ Counties of _England_, and Wood-land, Mountainous Countries,
as also _Cheshire_, and _Lancashire_, breed the _slow-Hound_; a large
great Dog, tall and heavy. _Worcestershire_, _Bedfordshire_, and many
other well mixt Soyls, where the Champaign and Covert are equally large,
produce the _Middle-sized Dog_; of a more nimble Composure than the
fore-mentioned, and fitter for Chace. _Yorkshire_, _Cumberland_,
_Northumberland_, and the _North_ parts, breed the Light, Nimble, _swift
slender Dog_. And our open Champaigns train up excellent _Grey-Hounds_,
hugely admired for his Swiftness, Strength, and Sagacity. And lastly,
the _little Beagle_ bred in all Countries, is of exceeding Cunning, and
curious Scent in Hunting. All these Dogs are highly set by in all remote
Parts, whose Princes and Lords tenderly cherish them as _Excellencies_,
and ambitiously sue for as _Rarities_.

For the _Choice_ of Hounds we are to rely much on their _Colours_, and
accordingly make our Election. The Best and most Beautiful of all for a
general Kennel, is, The _White Hound_, with black Ears, and a black spot
at the setting on of the Tail, and is ever found to be both of good
Scent, and good Condition, and will Hunt any Chace, but especially the
_Hare_, _Stag_, _Buck_, _Roe_, or _Otter_, not sticking at Woods or
Waters. The next is, the _Black_, the black-tann’d, or all Liver-hew’d,
or the milk White Hound, which is the true _Talbot_, is best for the
_String_, or _Line_, as delighting in Blood; the _Largest_ is the
comliest and best. The _Grizled_, usually shag-hair’d, are the best
Verminers, and so fittest for the _Fox_, _Badger_, or other hot Scents;
a couple of which let not your Kennel be without, as being exceeding
good cunning _Finders_.

For the _Shape_ of your _Hound_, you must consult the Climate of his
Breed, and the natural Composition of his Body; but by these following
Characters you may know a good _Hound_. If you like a large, _heavy_,
true _Talbot-like_ Hound, See

His _Head_ be round and thick. _Nose_ short and uprising. _Nostrils_
wide and large. _Eares_ large and down-hanging. _Upper-Lip-Flews_ lower
than his Nether Chaps. _Back_ strong and rising. _Fillets_ thick and
great. _Thighs_ and _Huckle-bones_ round. _Hams_ streight. _Tail_ long
and rush-grown. The _Hair of his Belly_ hard and stiff. _Legs_ big and
lean. _Foot_ like a _Fox_’s, well clawd and round. _Sole_ dry and hard.
All these shew an _able Hound_.

If you would choose a swift _light Hound_, the _Yorkshire_ one in the
generality will please you; for that (as these have) he ought to have a
_slenderer_ Head, _longer_ Nose, _shallower_ Ears and Flews, _broad_
Back, _gaunt_ Belly, _small Tayl_, _long_ Joints, _round_ Foot; and in
fine of a _Gray-Hound-like_ Make.

Thus much to direct the Choice of _Hounds_; now something ought to be
spoken of the _Composition of Kennels_, wherein I must appeal to the
Affection of the Gentleman, the Lover of this Sport, and let him tell me
the _Reasons_ that induced him to take pleasure in _Hounds_, Whether it
be he fancies _Cunning in Hunting_? Or _Sweetness_, _Loudness_, or
_Deepness of Cry_? Or for the _Training his Horses_? Or for the
_Exercise of his Body_ only?

If for _Cunning_ Hunting; breed your Dogs from the slowest and largest
of the forementioned _Northern_ Hounds, and the swiftest and slenderest
of the _West Country_, of both Kinds, approved to be not given to lie
off, or look for Advantages, but staunch, fair, even-running, and of
perfect fine Scent. These will make a Horse gallop fast, and not run;
being middle-siz’d; not too swift as to out-run, or too slow as to lose
the Scent; are the best for the true Art and Use of Hunting.

If for _Sweetness of Cry_; compound your Kennel of some large Dogs, of
deep solemn Mouths, and swift in spending, as the _Base_ in the Consort;
Then twice so many roaring, loud ringing Mouths, as the _Counter-Tenor_:
And lastly, some hollow plain sweet Mouths, as the _Mean_: So shall your
Cry be perfect. Observe that this Composition be of the swiftest and
largest deep Mouth’d Dog, the slowest and middle-siz’d, and the shortest
Legged slender Dog. For these run even together; and warble forth their
musical Notes most sweetly.

If for _Loudness of Mouth_, choose the Loud clanging (redoubling as it
were) Mouth, and to this put the roaring, spending, and Whining Mouth,
which will be loud, smart, and pleasant: Such are for the most part your
_Shropshire_, and _Worcestershire_ Dogs.

If (Lastly) for _Deepness of Cry_, the largest Dogs having the greatest
Mouths, and deepest Flews, are the best; such are your _West-Country_,
_Cheshire_, and _Lancashire_ Dogs.

But if you have your Kennel for _Training Horses_ only; then compound
your Kennel of the lightest, nimblest, and swiftest Dogs, such as your
_Northern_ Hounds are. For the strong and violent Exercises of their
Horses, through the natural Velocity of their Hounds, in the _North_
parts, have render’d them famous for Truth and Swiftness above all other
parts of _England_; though they have not attained this through a better
Breeding of their Horses than others, but by daily acquainting them with
the Violence of such Exercises, which made it both familiar and natural
to them. And _He that doth not train up his Horse so, puts a Cheat upon
himself_.

Lastly, If for the _Maintenance of your Health_, by preventing
Infirmities and Grossness of Humours, you compose your Kennel; consult
first your own _Ability_ for this Exercise; and if you think you are
able to _foot_ it away, then the _Biggest and slowest Dogs_ you can get
are best; which you may bring so to your Command, as to make them Hunt
with no more speed than you please to lead them. And herein you are
surrounded with a double Delight; to hear their _Musick_, and observe
their ambitious and eager _Striving to out-go one another_, in the
Pursuit of their Game, and yet restrained by a submissive Compliance to
their Masters Pleasure, beyond which they dare not presume to pass. But
if you would _pad it_ away through an Unability of footing it, Then
choose the _slowest or middle-sized Hounds_, of good Mouths and Noses,
for loud Cry, and ready Scent.

Thus far for the Composing a Kennel: I come now to the _Kennel it self_,
of which I need say little, as indeed unnecessary, leaving that to the
Discretion of the _Huntsman_; Only I would have him observe, that it be
built some pretty way distant from the Dwelling-House, in a warm dry
place, free from Vermine, and near some Pond or River of fresh Water;
and so placed, that the Morning Sun may shine upon it. Be sure to keep
it clean, and let them not want fresh Straw every day. Feed them early
in the Morning at Sun-rising, and at Sun-set in the Evening. As for
their _Meat_, I leave to the ingenious Huntsman to get; Only this I must
tell him, Three Bushels of Oates or Barley-Meal, with the half so much
Bran or Mill-dust, besides the Horse-Flesh, Scraps, Bones, Crusts, &c.
which the painful Huntsman can procure, is a fit weekly Proportion to
keep _nine_ or _ten_ Couple of Hounds. When they come from Hunting,
after you have fed them well, let them to their Kennel, and wash their
Feet with Beer and Butter, or some such thing, and pick and search their
Cleys, for Thorns, Stubs, or the like: If it is in _Winter_, let a fire
be made, and let them beak and stretch themselves for an hour or so at
the fire, and suffer them to lick, pick, and trim themselves; hereby to
prevent the _Diseases_ incident to them, upon sudden Cooling, as the
_Mange_, _Itch_, _Feavors_, &c. of which I come now to speak.

But before I treat of the keeping your Hounds in Health by curing their
diseases, I must speak a Word or two of the way to _Breed good Whelps_,
viz. Having a Hound and a Bratch of that general Goodness in Size,
Voice, Speed, Scent, and Proportion you like, put them together to
ingender in _January_, _February_, or _March_, as the properest Months
for Hounds, Bitches, and Bratches to be Limed in; because of not _losing
time_ to enter them. When you put them together, observe, as near as you
can, if the _Moon_ be in _Aquarius_ or _Gemini_; because the Whelps will
then never run Mad, and the Litter, will be double as many Dog, as
Bitch, Whelps. When your Bitch is near her _Whelping_, separate her from
the other Hounds, and make her a Kennel particularly by her self; and
see her Kennell’d every Night, that she might be acquainted and
delighted with it, and so not seek out unwholsom Places; for if you
remove the Whelps after they are Whelp’d, the Bitch will carry them up
and down till she come to their first Place of Littering; and that’s
very dangerous. Suffer not your Whelps to Suck above two Months, and
then _Weane_ them.

When your Whelps are brought up, _enter_ them not into Hunting till they
are at least a Year and half old: That is, if whelpt in _March_, enter
them _September_ come Twelve-Month; if in _April_, in _October_ come
Twelve-months after, _&c._

When you would _enter_ them, bring them abroad, with the most Staunch
and best Hunting Hounds; (all babling and flying Curs being left at
home:) and a _Hare being the best entering Chase_, get your _Hare_ ready
before, and putting her from her Form, view which way she takes, and
then lay on your Hounds, giving them all the Advantages may be; if she
is caught, do not suffer them to break her, but immediately taking her,
strip off her Skin, and cutting her to peices, give every part to your
young Whelps; and that will beget in them a Delight in Hunting, and
animate them with Courage. And now let us return to speak of


_Diseases incident to Dogs, and their Cures._

Because I should think it a very odd Humor for a Person to select these
Creatures (Hounds) as instruments for the procurement of his Health
Satisfaction, and Delight, and should be so inhumane as to suffer them
to perish in their _Diseases_, because they cannot communicate their
_Ailings_, and beseech _Redress_; therefore I have briefly summed up the
immediate _Cures_ for their several Diseases, and by preventing his
Excuse of _Ignorance_, desire his Application, as need require.

_For Sick Dogs._ Take Sheeps-heads, Wooll and all, hack, hew, and bruise
them into pieces, make Pottage of it, with Oatmeal, and _Penny-Royal_,
and give it warm.

_Lice and Fleas._ Boyl four or five handfuls of _Rue_ or _Herb of
Grace_, in a gallon of running Water, till a pottle be consumed, strain
it, and put two Ounces of _Staves-acre_ poudered, and bathe them with it
warm.

_Itch._ Take Oyl of _Flower-de-Lys_, powder of _Brimstone_, & dry’d
_Elicampane_ Roots, of each a like quantity, and _Bay-Salt_ powdered;
mix these Powders with the Oyl, and warm it, anoint, scratch, and make
it bleed, will do well.

_Tetter._ Take Black _Ink_, Juice of _Mint_ & _Vinegar_, of each a like,
mix them altogether with the Powder of _Brimstone_ to a Salve, and
Anoint it.

_Worms._ Give your Hound _Brimstone_ and new Milk, will kill them.

_Gauling._ May _Butter_, yellow _Wax_, and unslackt _Lime_, made to a
Salve, and Anoint therewith, is a present Remedy.

_Mange._ Take two handfuls of _Wild-Cresses_, of _Elecampane_, of the
Leaves and Roots of _Roerb_ and _Sorrel_, the like quantity, and two
pound of the Roots of _Frodels_, Boyl them all well in Lye and Vinegar,
strain it, and put therein two pound of _Grey soap_, and after ’tis
melted, rub your Hound with it four or five dayes together; and ’tis an
excellent Remedy.

_For any Ear Disease._ Mix _Verjuice_ and _Chervile_ Water together, and
drop into his Eares a spoonful or two, morning and Evening.

_Sore Eyes._ Chew a Leaf or two of _Ground Ivy_, and spit the Juice into
his Eyes.

_Surbaiting._ Wash his Feet with _Beer_ and _Butter_, and bind young red
_Nettles_ beaten to a Salve to his Soles.

_Biting by Snake, Adder,_ &c. Beat the herb _Calaminth_ with
_Turpentine_, and yellow _Wax_ to a Salve, and apply it. To expel the
inward Poyson, give the said Herb in Milk.

_Biting by a Mad Dog._ Wash the place with _Sea-Water_, or strong
_Brine_, will Cure him. The quantity of a Hazel-Nut of _Mithridate_,
dissolved in sweet Wine, will prevent inward Infection.

_Madness._ Lastly, If your Hound be Mad, which you will soon find by his
separating himself from the rest, throwing his Head into the Wind,
foaming and slavering at Mouth, snatching at every thing he meets, red
fiery Eyes, stinking filthy Breath; then to Knock him in the Head, is a
present Remedy, and you’l prevent infinite Dangers.

And now I proceed to give some brief Instructions for Hunting the
several _Chases_ used in _England_, for which we have chosen our Hounds;
I mean the _Time when?_ and the _Manner how?_

Having your Kennel of Hounds in good order and plight, and being
desirous to enjoy those Pleasures, for which we have observed the
aforesaid Rules; Lead them forth, and to your Game (Gentlemen:) Only
take this _Caution_ along with you; Do not forget to have in your Pack a
couple of _Hounds_, called _Hunters in the Highwayes_, that will Scent
upon hard Ground, where we cannot perceive Pricks or Impressions; and
for your Huntsman’s and your own Ease, let a couple of _Old stench
Hounds_ accompany you, by whose sure Scent, the too great Swiftness of
the young and unexperienced Ones may be restrained and regulated; and if
you please, take the following Observations with you, and away.


Of _Hart_ or _Stag-Hunting_.

Waving the Praises of this Creature, and the large _Encomiums_ due to
his several Excellencies, we’ll come to the Doctrinal Part, and
understand the _Age_ of this our Game, which is known by several Marks,
amongst which this is the most authentick: That if you take his view in
the ground, and perceive he has a large Foot, a thick Heel, a deep
Print, open Cleft and long space, then be assured he is Old; as the
Contrary concludes him Young.

But _Where_ and _When_ shall we find him? Examine the following Annual
or monethly Season-Description, and you shall find him; begining at the
end of Rutting-time, that is, In

_November_, in Heaths among Furs, Shrubs and Whines.

_December_, in Forrests among thick and strong Woods.

_January_, in Corners of the Forrests, Corn-fields, _Wheat_, _Rye_, &c.

_February_ and _March_, Amongst young and thick Bushes.

_April_ and _May_, in Coppices and Springs.

_June_ and _July_, in Out-Woods and Purlieus nearest the Corn Fields.

_September_ and _October_, After the first showers of Rain, they leave
their Thickets, and go to Rut, during which time there is no certain
place to find them in.

When you have found him in any of these places, be careful to go up the
Wind; and the best time to find him is _before Sun-rising_, when he goes
to feed; then watch him to his Leir, and having lodged him, go and
prepare; if he is not forced, he will not budge till Evening.
Approaching his Lodging, cast off your _Finders_, who having Hunted him
a Ring or two, cast in the rest; and being in full Cry and maine Chace,
Comfort and Cheer them with Horne and Voice. Be sure to take notice of
him by some _Mark_, and if your Dogs make _Default_, rate them off and
bring them to the Default back, and make them cast about till they have
undertaken the first Deer; Then cheer them to the utmost, and so
continue till they have either set up or slain him. It is the Nature of
a _Stag_, to seek for one of his kind, when he is Imbost or weary, and
beating him up, ly down in his place; therefore have a watchful eye unto
_Change_. As likewise by taking _Soil_ (_i. e._ Water) he will swim a
River just in the middle down the Stream, covering himself all over, but
his Nose, keeping the middle, least by touching any Boughes he leave a
Scent for the Hounds; And by his Crossings and Doublings he will
endeavour to baffle his Pursuers: In these Cases have regard to your
_Old Hounds_, as I said before. When he is _Imbost_ or weary, may be
known thus: By his Creeping into holes, and often lying down, or by his
running stiff, high and lumpering, slavering and foaming at Mouth,
shining and blackness of his Hair, and much Sweat; And thus much for
_Stag_ or _Hart Hunting_. As for the _Buck_ I shall not speak any thing,
for he that can Hunt a _Stag_ well, cannot fail Hunting a _Buck_ well.
As likewise for the _Roe-Hunting_, I refer you to what is spoken of the
_Hart_ or _Stag_.


_Of Hare Hunting._

As for the _Time_, the most proper to begin this Game, note; That about
the middle of _September_ is best and to end towards the latter end of
_February_, when surcease, and destroy not the young early Brood of
_Leverets_; and this season is most agreeable likewise to the nature of
_Hounds_; moist and cool. Now for the _Place_ where to find her, you
must examine and observe the Seasons of the Year; for in Summer or
Spring time, you shall find them in Corn-fields and open places, not
sitting in Bushes, for fear of Snakes, Adders, _&c._ In _Winter_ they
love Tuffs of Thorns and Brambles, near Houses: In these places you must
regard the _Oldness_ or _Newness_ of her _Forme_ or Seat, to prevent
Labour in Vain: If it be plain and smooth within, and the Pad before it
flat and worn, and the Prickles so new and perceptible, that the Earth
seems black, and fresh broken, then assure your self the Forme is new,
and from thence you may Hunt and recover the _Hare_; if the contrary
(which narrowly observe) it is Old, and if your _Hounds_ call upon it,
rate them off; the Scent is Old. When the _Hare_ is started and on Foot,
step in where you saw her pass, and hollow in your _Hounds_ till they
have undertaken it, then go on with full Cry. Above all be sure to
observe her first Doubling, which must be your direction for all that
day; for all her other after Doublings will be like that. When she is
thus reduced to the _slights_ and _shifts_ she makes by Doublings and
Windings, give your Dogs _Time_ and _Place_ enough to cast about your
Rings, for unwinding the same; and observe her _leaps_ and _skips_
before she squat, and beat curiously all likely places of Harbour: She
is soon your Prey now.


_Of Coney-Catching._

Their _Seasons_ are alwayes, and the way of taking them thus: Set
Pursenets on their Holes, and put in a _Ferret_ close muzzled, and she
will bolt them out (being a natural Enemy to them) into the Nets: Or
blow on the suddain the Drone of a Bag-Pipe into the Burrows, and they
will boult out: Or for want of either of these two, take powder of
_Orpine_ and _Brimstone_ and boult them out with the Smother: But pray
use this last seldom, unless you would destroy your Warren. But for this
sport _Hays_ are to be preferred above all.


_Of Fox Hunting._

_January_, _February_, and _March_, are the best Seasons for Hunting the
_Fox_ above ground, the scent being then strong, and the coldest Weather
for the _Hounds_, and best finding his Earthing. Cast off your sure
Finders first, and as the _Drag_ mends, more; but not too many at once,
because of the Variety of Chaces in Woods and Coverts. The night before
the day of Hunting, when the _Fox_ goes to prey at midnight, find his
Earths, and stop them with Black Thorns and Earth. To find him draw your
_Hounds_ about Groves, Thickets, and Bushes near Villages; Pigs and
Poultrey inviting him to such Places to Lurk in. They make their Earths
in hard Clay, stony ground, and amongst Roots of Trees; and have but one
Hole straight and long. He is usually taken, with _Hounds_,
_Grey-Hounds_, _Terriers_, _Nets_ and _Gins_.


_Of Badger-Hunting._

This Creature has several Names, as _Gray_, _Brock_, _Boreson_, or
_Bauson_; and is hunted thus. First go seek the Earths and Burrows where
he lieth, and in a clear Moon-shine Night, stop all the Holes but one or
two, and in these fasten Sacks with drawing strings; and being thus set,
cast off your _Hounds_ and beat all the Groves, Hedges, and Tuffs within
a mile or two about, and being alarum’d by the Doggs they will repair to
their Burrows and Kennells, and running into the Bags are taken. Other
Methods there are which are used, but the Common usage makes me omit.


_Of the Martern or wild-Cat._

These two Chaces are usually hunted in _England_, and are as great
Infesters of Warrens, as the two last mentioned Vermine, but are not
purposely to be sought after; unless the Huntsman see their place of
Prey, and can go to it; and if the _Hound_ chance to cross them, sport
may be had. But no Rule can be prescribed how to find or hunt them.


_Of the Otter._

This Creature useth to lye near Rivers in his Lodging, which he
cunningly & artificially builds with Boughs, Twiggs and Sticks. A great
Devourer of Fish, and eatable in some Countries, where they have _good
stomacks_. It is a very sagacious and exquisitely smelling Creature, and
much Cunning and Craft is required to hunt him. But to take him, observe
this in short: Being provided with _Otter-Spears_ to watch his Vents,
and good _Otter-Hounds_, beat both sides of the Rivers banks, and you’ll
soon find if there is any. If you find him, and perceive where he swims
under Water, get to stand before him when he _Vents_, (_i. e._ takes
breath) and endeavour to strike him with the spear: If you miss him,
follow him with your Hound, and if they are good for _Otter_, they will
certainly beat every Tree-root, _Bulrush-Bed_, or _Osier-Bed_, so that
he cannot escape you.


_Of the Wild Goat._

This being a _Welsh-Chace_, I thought it not amiss to say something of
it, as not altogether Forreign. The _Wild-Goat_ is as bigg and as fleshy
as a _Hart_, but not so long-legg’d. The best time for hunting them is,
at _All-hollontide_; and having observed the Advantages of the Coasts,
Rocks, and places where the _Goats_ lie, set Nets and Toiles towards the
Rivers and Bottoms; for ’tis not to be imagined, the Doggs can follow
them down every place of the Mountaines. Stand some on the tops of the
Rocks, and as Occasion offers throw down Stones; and place your Relays
at the small Brooks or Waters, where the _Goat_ comes down; but let them
not tarry till the _Hounds_ come in, that were cast off.

_Thus much for Hunting._




Of Racing.


As all _Beasts_ are Subservient to _Man_, and he a Liberty and Power to
Use them, and make them his Instruments, for the Procurement of his
_Profit_, or _Pleasure_; so is there not a Creature more Serviceable to
man in either of these, as the _Horse_. A _Beast_ Valiant, Strong,
Nimble and Hardy, the Vivacity of whose Spirits, neither Heat can
scorch, or dry up, nor Cold benumb or freez; he is Valiant, Watchfull,
and Laborious, naturally Cleanly, and of exquisite Scent; Gentle and
Loving to man, docile, and of a retentive Memory, and Apt or Fit for the
performing any Service wherein man employes him. And for the Use of
which I am now speaking (_Racing_) he ought to be endued with these
Qualifications. That he have the _Finest Cleanest Shape_ possible, and
above all, _Nimble_, _Quick_, and _Fiery_, _apt to Fly with the least
Motion_; nor is a long Bodied contemptible, it assuring _Speed_, tho it
signifies _Weakness_ too. The _Arabian_, _Barbary_, or his Bastard, are
esteemed the best for this Use, these excelling _Jennets_, though they
are good too.

Having furnished your self with a _Horse_ thus qualified, you are to
observe his right and due _Ordering_, before your designed _Racing_.
_Bartholomew-tide_ is the most proper time to _take him from Grass_; the
day before being Dry, Fair, and Pleasant: That Night let him stand
conveniently, to empty his Body; the next day _Stable_ him, and feed him
with _Wheat-straw_ that day, and no longer; lest you exceeding that
time, it straighten his _Guts_, heat his _Liver_, and hurt his _Blood_;
for want of _Straw_, Riding him Morning and Evening to _Water_, Airing,
or other moderate Exercises will serve. Then feed him with good old
sweet _Hay_, and according to the Season, and Temperature of his Body
clothe him; for a _Smooth Coat_ shews _Cloth_ enough, and a _Rough Coat_
want of it. Observe likewise where you _Water_ your _Race-Horse_, that
it be a Running _Water_, or Clear _Spring_, far distant (a Mile or more)
from the _Stable_, adjoyning to some _Levell_; where after he has once
well drunk, Gallop him, and so _Water_ and _Scope_ him, till that he
refuse to drink more, for that time; then Walk him gently Home, (being
an Hour on your way, or more) clothe, and stop him round with soft
_Whisps_, and let him stand an Hour upon his _Bridle_, and after feed
him with sweet sound _Oats_, throughly dryed either with _Age_, _Kilne_,
or _Sun_; if he be low of Flesh, or bad Stomacht, add a third part of
Clean Old _Beans_, to two parts of _Oats_, or wash his _Oats_ in Strong
_Beer_ or _Ale_.

For _Dressing_ take these _Rules_. _Dress_ your _Horse_ twice a day,
before you _Water_ him, both Morning, and Evening, thus: _Curry_ him
after he is uncloath’d, from his _Ear-tips_ to his _Tayle_, and his
whole Body intirely (save his Legs under the Knees, and Cambrels) with
an _Iron Comb_; then Dust him, and Rub him with a _Brush_ of _Bristles_
over again. Dust him again, and wetting your hand in clean Water, rub
off all the loose Hairs, and so rub him dry as at first; then with a
fine _Hair Cloth_ rub him all over; and Lastly, with a fine _Linnen
Cloth_; and then pick his _Eyes_, _Nostrils_, _Sheath_, _Cods_, _Tuel_,
and _Feet_, clean.

The best _Food_ for your _Racer_, is good, sweet, well dryed, sunned,
and beaten _Oats_: Or else _Bread_ made of one part _Beans_, and two
parts _Wheat_ (_i. e._) two _Bushells_ of _Wheat_, to one of _Beans_,
ground together: Boult through a fine _Range_ half a _Bushell_ of fine
_Meal_, and bake that in two or three _Loaves_ by it self, and with
_Water_, and good store of _Barme_, knead up, and bake the rest in great
_Loaves_, having sifted it through a _Meal-sieve_: [But to your _Finer_,
you would do well to put the _Whites_ of Twenty or Thirty _Eggs_, and
with the _Barme_ a little _Ale_, ’tis no matter how little _Water_:]
With the _Courser_ feed him on his Resting dayes, on his Labouring dayes
with the _Finer_.

The best _Time for feeding_ your _Runner_ on his _Resting-dayes_ is;
After his _Watering_ in the Morning, at _One_ a Clock at Noon, after his
_VVatering_ in the Evening, and at _Nine_ or _Ten_ a Clock at Nights: On
his _Dayes of Labour_, Two Hours after he is throughly Cold, outwardly
and inwardly, as before.

As for the Proportion of Meat, I shall not confine your Love to a
Quantity, only give him a little at once, as long as his Appetite is
Good: When he begins to fumble and play with his Meat, hold your Hand,
shut up your Sack.

As for his _Exercise_ it ought to be Thrice a Week, as his bodily
Condition requires; if he be foul, moderate Exercise will break his
Grease; if clean, then as you judge best, taking heed of breaking his
Mettle, or discouraging him, or laming his Limbs. Before you air him to
add to his Wind, it is requisite to give him a raw Egg broken in his
mouth: If your Horse be very _Fat_, air him before Sun-rising and after
Sun-set; if _Lean_, deprive him not of the least strength and Comfort of
the _Sun_ you can devise. To make him _Sweat_ sometimes by coursing him
in his Cloathes is necessary, if moderate; but without his Cloaths, let
it be sharp and swift. See that he be _empty before you Course him_; and
it is wholesome to wash his Tongue and Nostrills with _Vinegar_, or
_piss_ in his Mouth, before you back him. And after his Exercise, cool
him before you come home, house, litter and rub him well and dry; then
cloath him, and give him after every Course a Scouring thus prepared.


_For scouring a Race Horse._

Take 20 _Raisins of the Sun_ stoned, 10. _Figgs_ slit in the midst,
boyle them till they be thick in a Pottle of Fair Water, mix it with
Powder of _Annis-Seeds_, _Lycoras_, and _Sugar-candy_, till it come to a
stiff Paste, make them into round Balls, roul them in Butter, and give
him three or four of them the next morning after his Course, and ride
him an hour after, and then set him up Warm. Or this may be preferred,
being both a Purge and a Restorative, a Cleanser and a Comforter, thus
prepared.

Take three Ounces of _Annis-Seeds_, six Drams of _Cummin-Seeds_, one
Dram and half of _Carthamus_, one Ounce and two Drams of
_Fennugreek-Seed_, one Ounce and half of _Brimstone_; Beat all these to
a fine Powder, and searse them; then take a Pint and two Ounces of
_Sallet Oyl_, a pint and half of _Honey_, and a Pottle of _White-wine_;
then with a sufficient Quantity of fine white Meal, knead and work all
well into a stiff Paste; keep it in a clean Cloath, for use. When
occasion requires, dissolve a Ball of it in a Pail of Water, and after
Exercise give it him to drink in the Dark, that he may not see the
Colour, and refuse it: If he does refuse, let Fasting force him to be of
another mind.

To conclude, those Instructions, which are enumerated by Mr. _Markham_,
I will give you in short before you run, and then away as fast as you
can.

_Course not your Horse hard four or five dayes before your Match, lest
you make his Limbs sore, and abate his Speed._

_Muzzle him not (except a foul Feeder) above two or three Nights before
the Race, and the Night before his bloody Courses._

_Give him sharp, as well as gentle, Courses on the Race he is to run._

_Shoe him a day before you run him._

_Let him be empty on the Match Day._

_Saddle him in the Stable, and fix to him the Girths and Pannel with
Shoo-makers Wax._

_Lead him with all Gentleness to his Course, and let him smell other
Horses Dung to provoke him to stale_, &c.

And Lastly, Being come to the starting place rub him well, uncloath him,
then take his Back, and the Word given, with all Gentleness and
Quietness possible, start and away; _And God speed you well_.




Of Hawking,


I shall not insist on any large _Encomiums_ of this Recreation, only
that it is a most _Princely and serious Pleasure_; nor shall I amuse you
with subtle and nice _Distinctions_, and things no way material; But
will inform you with what is meerly necessary for the right
_Understanding and Use_ of this Noble Art. I shall begin then with
_Hawks_, their _Names_ and _Flights_.


_Of Hawks there are two sorts._

The Long-Winged Hawks.

  _Faulcon_ and _Tiercle-gentle_.
  _Gerfaulcon_ and _Jerkin_.
  _Saker_ and _Sakaret_.
  _Lanner_ and _Lanneret_.
  _Barbary Faulcon._
  _Merlin_ and _Jack_.
  _Hobby_ and _Jack_.

The Short-Winged Hawks.

  _Eagle_ and _Iron_.
  _Goshawk_ and _Tiercel_.
  _Sparrow-Hawk_ and _Musket_.

There are others too of inferiour sort as,

  _Ring-Tail._
  _Raven_ and _Buzzard_.
  _Forked Kite._
  _Hen-driver_, &c.

And as the _Age_ of these _Hawks_ is, so we name them, as

  The First Year a _Soarage_.
  The Second Year an _Intermewer_.
  The Third Year a _White Hawk_.
  The Fourth Year a _Hawk of the First Coat_.

Thus much for their _Names_, now we come to speak of the _Flights_ of
these _Hawks_; which are these

  The _Faulcon-Gentle_, for _Partridge_ or _Mallard_.
  _Gerfaulcon_, will fly at the _Herne_.
  _Saker_, at the _Crane_ or _Bittern_.
  _Lanner_, at the _Partridge_, _Pheasant_ or _Choofe_.
  _Barbary-Faulcon_, at the _Partridge_ only.
  _Merlin_ and _Hobby_, at the _Lark_, or any small Bird.
  _Goshawk_ and _Tiercel_, at the _Partridge_, or _Hare_.
  _Sparrow-Hawk_, at the _Partridge_ or _Black-Bird_. And the
  _Musket_, at the _Bush_.

Thus much for their several proper _Flights_, we are now come to their
_Manning_, the Method of which being generally one and the same (though
it has been the Labour of some to spend much Time, and many Words in
treating of the various wayes of _Manning Hawks_, and yet comes all to
one effect) I shall in short (according to the Design of this _Epitome_)
lay down this Rule: That you watch, and keep them from Sleep,
continually carrying them upon your _Fist_, familiarly stroak them with
a Wing of some Dead _Fowle_, or the like, and play with them; Accustome
to gaze, and look in their Face with a Loving, Smiling, Gentle
Countenance; and that will make her acquainted, and familiar with Man.

Having made them familiar, the next thing is to _Bring them to the
Lure_, (which the _Faulconer_ makes of _Feathers_, and _Leather_ much
like a _Fowle_, which he casts into the Air, and calls the _Hawk_ to)
which is after this manner. Set your _Hawk_ on the _Perch_, unhood her,
and shew her some _Meat_ within your _Fist_, call her by _Chirping_,
_Whistling_ or the like, till she comes, then Feed her with it; if she
comes not, let her Fast, and be sharp set: _Short-winged Hawks_, are
properly said to be _Called_, not _Lured_. Make her bold, and acquainted
with _Men_, _Dogs_, and _Horses_, and let her be eager and sharp-set,
before you shew her the _Lure_; knowing her _Luring_ Hours; and let both
sides of the _Lure_ be garnished with warm, and bloody _Meat_; let her
likewise know your _Voice_ well; so that being well acquainted with
_Voice_, and _Lure_, the Hearing of the one, or Sight of the other,
makes her Obedient; which you must reward by _Feeding_, or punish by
_Fasting_. But before _Luring_ (or any _Flight_) it is requisite to
_Bathe_ your _Hawk_ in some quiet and still shallow _Brook_, or for want
of that in a Large _Bason_, shallow _Tub_, or the like, lest being at
Liberty, you lose your _Hawk_, (whose Nature requires such Bathing) and
make her rangle. Now to make her know her _Lure_, is thus: Give your
_Hawk_ to another, and having loosned in readiness her Hood-strings, and
fastened a _Pullet_ to the _Lure_, go a little distance, cast it half
the length of the string about your Head, still _Luring_ with your
Voice, unhood your _Hawk_, and throw it a little way from her: If she
stoop and seize, let her plume the _Pullet_, and feed on it upon the
_Lure_: Then take her and Meat on your Fist, Hood her, and give her the
Tiring of the Wing, or Foot of the said _Pullet_.

Having _Manned_ and _Lured_ your _Hawk_, before you bring her to her
_Flight_, one thing is to be observed and done, called in the
_Faulconers Dialect_, _Enseaming_, which is to cleanse her from _Fat_,
_Grease_, & _Glut_, known by her round _Thighs_, and full _Meutings_;
and thus you may do it: In the Morning when you feed her, give her a bit
or two of _Hot-meat_, and at Night very little or nothing. Then feed her
Morning and Evening with a _Rook_, wash’d twice till the Pinions be
tender; then give a Casting of Feathers as her Nature will bear; and
once in two or three dayes give her a _Hens-neck_ well joynted and
washt: Then a quick train _Pigeon_ every Morning; and after by these and
her own Exercise, she has broken and dissolved the _Grease_, give her
three or Four _Pellets_ of the Root of _Sellandine_, as bigg as a
_Garden Pease_, steept in the Sirrup of _Roses_; and you have done this
part of your Duty.

To _Enter_ your _Hawks_, for _Partridge_ or _Fowle_, observe this. Lay
an Old Feild-_Partridge_ in a Hole, covered with something, and fasten
to it a small _Creance_ (_i. e._ a Fine small long Line of strong and
even-wound Packthread fastned to the _Hawks_ Leash when first Lured,)
and uncoupling your ranging _Spaniels_, pluck off the Covering of the
Traine _Partridge_ and let it go, and the _Hawk_ after it; and as soon
as she has slain it, reward her well with it. And thus to make her fly
at _Fowle_, feed her well with the _Traine_ of the Fowle you would have;
doing afterwards as above.

The _Faults_ of _Hawks_ differ according to their Nature and Make:
_Long-winged Hawks_ faults are thus helped. If she used _to take stand_,
flying at the River, or in Champain Feilds, shun flying near Trees or
Covert; or otherwise, let several Persons have _Trains_, and as she
offers to stand, let him that’s next her cast out his Traine, and she
killing it reward her. And indeed you ought never to be without some
live Bird or Fowle in your Bag, as _Pigeon_, _Duck_, _Mallard_, &c. If
she be _Froward_ and _Coy_; when she Kills, reward her not as usually,
but slide some other meat under her, and let her take her pleasure on
it; giving her some Feathers to make her scoure and cast. If she be
_Wild_, _look not inward_, but mind _Check_, (_i. e._ other Game, as
_Crows_, &c. that fly cross her) then lure her back, and stooping to it,
reward her presently.

The faults of _Short-Winged Hawks_ thus are helped. Sometimes the
_Goshawk_ and _Sparrow-Hawks_, will neither kill, nor _Fly_ the Game to
_Mark_, but will turn _Taile_ to it: Then encourage your Dogs to Hunt,
cast a Traine _Partridge_ before your _Hawk_, make her seize it, and
feed well upon it.

If a _Hawk take a Tree_, and will not fly at all, feed her then upon
quick Birds, and make her foot them, and in the plain Champaign Feilds
unhood her, and riding up and down a while let one cast out a
Feild-_Partridge_ before her, let her fly at it, and footing it feed on
it. If they be _too fond of Man_, that after a stroke or two will not
fly, be seldom familiar with her, and reward her not as she comes so
improperly: Otherwise reward her well.

As for _Mewing of Hawks_, the best time for _Long-winged Hawks_ is about
the middle of _April_, and _March_ for the _Short-Winged Hawks_. There
are two kinds of Mewings. 1. _At the stock or stone_; so called from its
being low upon the ground, free from Noise, Vermin or ill Air. 2. _At
large_; so called from being in a high Room, with open Windows towards
the _North_ or _North-East_. The former is accounted the best Mewing.
I shall not insist on the erecting or ordering of this Mew, leaving that
to the Discretion of the Faulconer; only before he mews his _Hawk_, see
if they have _Lice_, to pepper and scowre them too. The best _time to
draw _the Field_-Hawk from the Mew_, is in _June_, and she will be ready
to fly in _August_; the Hawks for the River in _August_, will be ready
in _September_. And because _Hawks_ are subject to divers Infirmities
and Diseases, I shall prescribe some Remedies, and so Conclude.


_Cures for Hawks Diseases._

The good Faulconer ought diligently to observe the Complexions of his
_Hawks Castings_ and _Mewtings_, to judge of their Maladies, and is
prescribed by some as an excellent way; and is indeed so; but an assured
sign of knowing whether they are sick or distempered is this. Take your
_Hawk_, turning up her Train, if you see her Tuel or Fundiment swelleth,
or looketh red; Or, if her Eyes or Eares be of a fiery Complexion, it is
an infallible sign of her being not well and in good health; and then
Scouring is necessary first; which is done by the most Soveraign _Aloes
Cicatrine_, about the quantity of a Bean, wrapt up in her Meat; and this
avoids Grease, and kills Wormes too.

_For the Cataract_: Take one Scruple of washt _Aloes_ finely beaten, and
two Scruples of _Sugar-candy_, mix these together, and with a Quil blow
it three or four times a day into your _Hawks_ Eye.

_Pantus_ or _Asthma_: Pour the Oyl of sweet _Almonds_ into a Chickens
Gutt, well washt, and give it the _Hawk_: Or, scower her with
_Sellandine_-Pellets, and Oyle of _Roses_, and then wash her meat in the
Decoction of _Coltsfoot_.

_Filanders_ or _Wormes_: To prevent them, seeing your Hawk low and poor,
give her once a month a Clove of _Garlick_. To cure or kill them; take
half a dozen Cloves of _Garlick_, boyle them very tender in _Milk_, then
take them and dry the Milk out of them; put them into a spoonful of the
best _Oyle of Olives_, and having steept them all Night, give them both
to your Hawk, when she has cast, in the morning; feed her not til two
hours after, and then with warm Meat, and keep her warm all that day.

_Lice_: Mail your Hawk in some Woollen Cloath, put between her Head and
Hood a little Wool, and take a Pipe of _Tobacco_, put the little end in
at the Tream, blow the smoak, and the Lice that escape Killing, will
creep into the Cloth: _Probatum_.

_Formica_: Take a little of the Gall of a _Bull_, and beating it with
_Aloes_, anoint the Beak of the Hawk, Morning and Evening.

_Frounce_: Take the Powder of _Allume_, reduced to a Salve with strong
Wine Vinegar, and wash her mouth with it; then take the Juice of
_Lollium_ and _Raddish_, mixt with Salt, and anoint the Sore.

_Apoplex_: Gather the Herb _Asterion_ (the Moon being in the Waine and
in the Sign _Virgo_) wash your Hawks meat with the Juice thereof when
you feed her, is Soveraign.

_Wounds_: Take the Juice of _English Tobacco_, or _Mouse-eare_, after
you have sticht it up, with a little Lint, bathe the place is highly
approved.

Many other Diseases there are, which others have largely treatad of, and
to whom I refer you in case of some Diseases, which may occur; and here
take leave to conclude this my discourse of Hawking:




Of Riding,


This Noble Art being rightly and throughly learnt, qualifies a Gentleman
for the three preceding Sports, and is for that Reason placed here, as a
necessary Attendant of them. And here we must first examine the Ends &
Design of our proposing this Art to our selves, & accordingly lay down
as briefly as may be the necessary Rules and Lessons are to be observed
and learnt, for the obtaining and prosecuting the same, and I take these
to be the usual Perfections we aime at, _To Ride well the great _Horse_,
for the Warrs or Service, and the _Horse_ for Pleasure_; of both which
as concisely as I can, in their Order.

As a _Preface_ to this, we must begin with _Taming a young Colt_. After
you have kept your Colt at home some time, and made him so Familiar with
you, as to suffer _Combing_, _Currying_, _Handling_, and _Stroaking_ any
part, ’tis high time then to offer him the Saddle, which you must lay in
the _Manger_ first, that by its smell, he may not be afraid of it, or
the _Styrrups_ Noise. Then gently saddling him (after his dressing) take
a sweet _Watring Trench_, anointed with Honey and Salt, and place it in
his Mouth so, that it may hang directly over his _Tush_; then lead him
abroad in your hand, and Water him; and after he has stood an hour
rein’d thus, take off his Bridle and Saddle, and let him feed till
Evening; Then do as in the morning; then dress and Cloath him, having
_Cherisht_ him before, _i. e._ By the _Voice_ delivered smoothly and
gently; or by the _Hand_ by gently stroaking and clapping him on the
neck, or buttock; or lastly by the _Rod_, by rubbing it on his Withers
or Main.

On the next day as before; and after that, put him on a strong
_Musrole_, or sharp _Cavezan_, and _Martingale_; which is the best guide
to a Horse for setting his Head in due place, forming the Rein, and
appearing Gracefull and Comely; it corrects the yerking out his Head, or
Nose, and prevents his running away with his Rider. Observe therefore to
place it right, that it be not buckled straight, but loose, and so low,
that it rest on the tender Grissle of his Nose, to make him the more
sensible of his Fault, and Correction; and so as you see you win his
Head, bring him straighter by degrees; let him but gently feel it, till
his Head be brought to its true Perfection.

Having observed this well, lead him forth into some soft or new Plowed
Land, and to take off his wanton knavish Tricks, trot him about in your
hand a good while: Then offer to Mount; if he refuse to suffer you, Trot
him again; then putting your foot into the _Styrrop_, mount half way; if
he takes it impatient, correct him, and about again; if not cherish him,
and place your self a moment in the Saddle, dismount, cherish, and feed
him with _Grass_, or _Bread_: All things being well, remount, even in
the Saddle, keeping your Rod from his Eye; then let one lead him by the
_Chaff-Halter_, and ever and a-non make him stand, and cherish him, till
he will of his one accord go forward; then come home, alight gently, and
do a good Horsemans Duty, _To dress and feed him well_. This Course in
few dayes will bring him to Trot, by following some other Horseman, stop
him now and then gently, and forward; not forgetting seasonable
_Cherishings_ and _Corrections_, by _Voice_, _Bridle_, _Rod_, _Spurs_.

Being thus brought to some certainty of _Reine_, and _Trotting_
forth-right, then to the _Treading forth of the large Rings_. And here
first examine your Horses Nature, before you choose your Ground, for, if
his Nature be dull and sloathful, yet strong, then _New-plow’d-Field_ is
best; if _Active_, _Quick_, and _Fiery_, then _Sandy-ground_ is to be
preferred; in the most proper of which mark out a large Ring, of a
Hundred Paces circumference. Now then walk about it on the right seven
or eight times, then by a little straightning your right Rein, and
laying your left Leg Calf to his side, make a half Circle within the
Ring upon your right down to its Center; then by straightning a little
your left Rein, and laying your right Leg Calf to his side, make a half
Circle to your left hand, from the Center to the outmost Verge, and
these you see contrary turned make a Roman S. Now to your first large
Compass, walk him about on your left hand, as oft as before on the
right, and change to your right within your Ring; then Trot him first on
the right-hand, then on the left, as long as you judge fit, and as often
Mornings, and Evenings as the Nature of your Horse shall require. In the
same manner you may make him to _Gallop_ the same Rings, though you must
not enter it all at once, but by degrees, first a Quarter, then a
Half-quarter; and the Lightness and Cheerfulness of your Body, not the
Spur, must induce him to it.

The next Lesson is to _Stop Fair, Comely, and without Danger_. First see
that the Ground be hard and firm, then having cherisht your Horse, bring
him to a swift Trot, about Fifty Paces, and then straightly and suddenly
draw in your Bridle hand; then ease a little your hand to make him give
backward, and in so doing, give him liberty, and cherish him; then
drawing in your Bridle hand, make him retire, and go back; if he strike,
ease your hand; if he refuse, let some by-stander put him back, that he
may learn your intention; and thus he may Learn these Two Lessons at
once.

_To Advance before_, when he stoppeth, is thus taught: When you stop
your Horse, without easing your hand, lay close and hard to his sides
both the Calves of your Legs, and shaking your Rod cry, _Up, Up_; which
he will understand by frequent Repetition, and Practice: This is a
Gracefull, and Comely Motion, makes a Horse Agile, and Nimble, and ready
to Turn; and therefore be carefull in it: That he take up his Legs
_Even_ together, and bending to his Body; not too high, for fear of his
coming over; not sprawling, or pawing; or for his own pleasure; in these
faults correct him with Spur and Rod.

To _Yerk out behind_ is the next Lesson, thus learnt: Presently upon
your making him stop, give him a good brisk jerk near his Flank, which
will make him soon understand you. When he does it, cherish him; and see
he does it comely, for to yerk out his hinder Legs, till his Forelegs be
above ground, is not graceful; or one Leg yerk’t further out than the
other; or one Leg out while the other is on the ground; in this case a
single Spur on the faulty side is best. But to help him in Yerking,
staying his mouth on the Bridle, striking your Rod under his belly,
or touching him on the Rump with it, are reckoned necessary.

To _Turn readily on both hands_, thus: Bring his large Rings narrower,
& therein gently walk him, till acquainted. Then carry your Bridle-hand
steady and straight, the outmost rather straighter then the inmost Rein,
to look from, rather than to the Ring; Trot him thus about, on one side
and the other successively, as aforesaid. After some time stop, and make
him advance twice or more, and retire in an even Line; then stop and
cherish him. To it again, after the same manner, making him lap his
outmost Leg above a foot over his inner. And thus the _Terra a Terra_,
_Incavalere_ & _Chambletta_, are all taught together. Perfect your Horse
in the large Ring, and the straight Ring is easily learnt.

Your Horse being brought thus far to perfection, with the _Musrole_ and
_Trench_, now let a gentle _Cavezan_ take their place; with a smooth
Cannon-Bit in his Mouth, & a plain watering Chain, Cheek large, and the
Kirble thick, round and big, loosely hanging on his nether Lip; and thus
mount him, and perfect your Horse with the _Bit_ in all the ’foresaid
Lessons, as you did with the _Snaffle_; which indeed is the easier to be
done of the two.

To teach your Horse _To go aside_, as a necessary Motion for shunning a
blow from an Enemy, is thus: Draw up your Bridle-hand somewhat straight,
and if you would have him go on the Right, lay your left Rein close to
his Neck, and your left Calf likewise close to his side (as in the
_Incavalere_ before) making him lap his left Leg over his Right; then
turning your Rod backward, jerking him on the left hinder Thigh gently,
make him to bring to the right side his Hinder parts, and stand as at
first in an even direct Line: Then make him remove his Fore parts more,
that he may stand as it were Cross over the even Line, and then bring
his hinder parts after, and stand in an even Line again. And thus you
must do, if you would have him go on the Left hand, using your
Corrections & Cherishings on the right. Use it, and you may be sure of
Perfection.

As for the _Manages_, somewhat have bin spoken of them, there being but
two (among many) useful call’d _Terra a Terra & Incavalere_ before
treated of; & for the _Carreere_, only take this: Let it not extend in
length above six-score yards, give your Horse warning before you start
him by the Bridle hand, and running full speed, stop him suddenly, firme
and close on his Buttock.

For the _Horse of Pleasure_, these following Lessons are to be learnt.
As first to _Bound aloft_, to do which: Trot him some sixteen yards,
then stop, and make him twice advance; then straighten your Bridle-hand;
then clap briskly both your Spurs even together to him, and he will
rise, though it may at first amaze him; if he does it, cherish him, and
repeat it often every day, till perfect.

Next to _Corvet_ and _Capriole_ are Motions of the same nature, and in
short are thus taught. Hollow the ground between two joyning Walls a
Horses Length, by the side of which put a strong smooth Post of the same
length from the Wall, and fasten at the Wall an Iron Ring over against
the Post: Thus done, ride into the hollow place, and fasten one of the
_Cavezan-Reins_ to the Post, and the other to the Ring; then cherish
him, and by the help of the Calves of your Legs, make him advance two or
three times; then pause, and Cherish him; make him advance again a dozen
times more, and then rest; double your Advancings, and repeat them till
it becomes habitual to him, to keep his _Ground_ certain, advance of an
_equall height_ before and behind, and observe a _due Time_ with the
motions of your Leggs. The Inequality of his advancing his hinder Legs,
is helpt by a Jerk on the Fillets by some body behind him with a Rod.

The laborious Motion of _going sideways_, being fitter for the
War-Horse, than the Horse for Pleasure, usefull for the avoiding a Blow
may come from an Enemy, I omit here, refering you to that.

Thus much for those material Lessons which the Rider ought to teach his
Horse for _War_ or _Pleasure_, and therefore I shall conclude this Head,
with this _Caveat_, _That in whatever Lesson your Horse is most
imperfect, begin and end with_; and remember, that _Exercise_ makes
things as it were natural; when _Desuetude_ is the forerunner of
Forgetfulness, and _Ignorance_ the Consequent of Both.



OF

Cock-fighting


I shall not enlarge on the praises of this Recreation, its _Nobleness_,
_Delight_, and _Simplicity_, devoyd of Cheat or Deceit, but what is most
material to our purpose succinctly declare. And herein let us first
observe the _Choice_ of a _Cock_ of the Game, directed by these four
Characters following: That he be

1. Of a strong _Shape_, proud and upright, and for this the
_Middle-sized_, neither too small or too large, is best, because most
matchable, strong and nimble. His _Head_ small like a _Spar-Hawks_; his
_Eye_ large and quick; _Back_ strong, crook’t at the setting on, and
coloured as the Plume of his Feathers; The _Beam of his Leg_ very
strong, and colour’d as his Plume; _Spurs_ long, rough, and sharp,
hooking inward.

2. Of a good _Colour_, and herein the Gray, Yellow, or Red Pyle, with a
black Breast, are to be preferred; the Pyde rarely good, and the White
and Dun never. A Scarlet Head is a demonstration of Courage, but a Pale
and wan of Faintness.

3. Of _Courage_ true, which you shall observe by his proud, stately,
upright Standing and Walking, and his frequent Crowing in his Pen.

4. Of a _Sharp and ready Heel_, which is (in the Opinion of the best
_Cock-Masters_,) of high Estimation; a _Sharp-heel’d Cock, tho somewhat
false, is better_ (as dispatching his business soonest) _than a true
Cock with a dull Heel_. Enfine choose your _Cock_ endued with all these
Qualifications together above mentioned.

For _Breeding_ good Cocks for the Game, or Battel, the best season is
from the Moon’s Encrease in _February_, to her Encrease in _March_. The
_March_ Bird is best. And now first get a _perfect Cock, to a perfect
Hen_, as the best Breeding, and see the Hen be of an excellent
Complexion (_i. e._) rightly plumed, as black, brown, speckt, grey,
grissel, or yellowish; tufted on her Crowne, large bodied, well poked,
and having Weapons, are Demonstrations of Excellency and Courage.
Observe further her Comportment, if friendly to her Chickens, and
revengeful of Injuries from other Hens. _Fortes creantur a Fortibus._

Having placed her _Nest_, private from other Fowles disturbance, and
warme, observe your Hen in sitting, if she be busie in turning her Eggs;
if remiss, to help her. Set by her Sand, Gravel, Water and necessary
food, to prevent her Straggling.

After one and twenty dayes observe her _Hatching_, to take the newly
hatcht Chickens, and wrap them in Wool and keep them warm by the fire
till all be disclosed; then put them all under her, and let her keep
them warm, and let none of them straggle abroad till they are three
Weeks, or a Month old; and then let them run in some Grass-plat, or
green Court, to pick Wormes, Grass and Chick-weed, to feed and scour
themselves; but let them not ramble near Puddles, or filthy Channels;
and to prevent any malady, a few Leek-blades minc’d small amongst their
Meat is good.

When they are grown so, as that their Sexes may be distinguish’t, assoon
as the _Comb_ or _Wattles_ but appear, cut them away, and anoint the
Sore with sweet _Butter_, till whole. This early cutting them, is highly
necessary to prevent Flux of Blood, (which is dangerous in doing it
later) and Gouty thick Heads.

When the _Cock_, and _Hen-Chickens_, (going till now promiscuously one
with another) begin to quarrel and peck each other, part them and
separate their _Walks_: And the best for a _Fighting-Cock_, are private
and undisturbed _Walks_, as, _Wind-mills_, _Water-mills_,
_Grange-houses_, _Park-lodges_, &c. and their _Feeding-place_ on soft
Ground, or Boards; and have for his Meat, _White Corn_, or _White-bread
Tosts_, steept in _Drink_, or _Urine_, is good, both to Scowre, and Cool
them. And do not debilitate and debauch his Courage and Strength, by
having too many _Hens_ to walk with; Three _Hens_ are enough for one
_Cock_.

If before they be Six Months Old any of your _Chickens_ _Crow_ clear and
loud, and unseasonable, then to the _Pot_ or _Spit_ with them, they are
_Cowards_; the true _Cock_ is long ere he gets his Voice, and when he
has gotten it, keeps good and judicious _Time_ in Crowing.

Next observe your _Roosting-Perch_, for this makes or marrs a _Cock_;
for forming of which, consult the best _Cock-Masters_ Feeding-Pens, and
the Perches there, and accordingly proportion your own, therefore I
shall not propose any form here; Only pray take care that the ground
underneath the Perch be soft, for if the ground be rough and hard, in
leaping down he will hurt his _Feet_, and make them Gouty and Knotty.

For the _Dieting_, and _Ordering_ of your _Cock_ for _Battle_, observe
these Rules. Let your _Cock_ be full two years Old, then in the latter
end of _August_, take up and _Pen_ him, (it being now _Cocking-time_
till the end of _May_) and see that he be sound, hard-feather’d, and
full summed. As to the moving _Perch_, and _Pen_, take my foregoing
Advice.

The first four dayes after _Penning_; Feed him with the Crumb of Old
_Manchet_ cut into square bits, thrice a day, and with the Coldest, and
Sweetest Spring-water that can be had. And after you think by this time
he is throughly purged of his _Corne_, _Wormes_, _Gravel_, and other
course Feeding, take him in the Morning out of the _Pen_, and let him
_Sparr_ with another _Cock_ some time to heat and chafe their Bodies,
break Fat and Glut, and fit them for Purgation; first having covered
their Spurs with Hots of Leather, to hinder their Wounding and drawing
Blood of one another.

After they have sufficiently _Sparred_, that they pant again, take them
up, and remove their Hots, and prepare them for a Diaphoretick or
Sweating Bout thus: Take _Butter_, and _Rosemary_ finely chopt, and
_White-Sugar-candy_, mixt together; and give them the quantity of a
_Wallnut_; which will scower, strengthen, and prolong Breath: Then
having (purposely) deep _Straw Baskets_, fill them half way with
_Straw_, put in your _Cock_, and cover him with _Straw_ to the top; lay
the lid close, and let him stove till the Evening. At Five a Clock take
him out, and lick his Head and Eyes with your Tongue, then Pen him, and
fill his _Trough_ with _Manchet_ (as above) and hot _Urine_.

After this, let his _Diet_ be of _Bread_ thus made: Take a _Gallon_ of
_Wheat_, and _Oat-meal-flower_, and with _Ale_, half a score _Whites_ of
_Eggs_, and _Butter_, work it into a stiff _Paste_; bake it into broad
_Cakes_, and when four dayes Old, cut it into square Bits, as abovesaid.

The second day after _Sparring_, bring your _Cock_ into a _Green Close_,
and shew him in your Arms a _Dung-hill-Cock_, then run from him, and
allure him thus to follow, suffering him now and then to strike the
_Dunghill-Cock_, and so Chase him up and down for half an Hour, till he
pants again; and thus heated, carry him home, and scower him with half a
Pound of _Fresh-Butter_, beaten with the _Leaves_ of the _Herb_ of
_Grace_, _Hysop_, and _Rosemary_, to the consistence of a _Salve_, and
give him the quantity of a _VVallnut_, then _Stove_, and _Feed_ him as
above. And thus for the first _Fortnight_, _Spar_ or _Chase_ him every
other day.

The second _Fortnight_, twice a Week will be enough to _Chase_ or _Spar_
your _Cock_: Observing, that you _Stove_ and _Scower_ him,
proportionable to his Heating.

The Third and Last _Fortnight_ (for Six Weeks is long enough) _Feed_
him as before, but do not _Spar_ him, but Chase him moderately twice,
or thrice, as before; then roll his aforesaid scowring in
_Brown-Sugar-candy_, to prevent his being Sick; rest him four dayes,
and then to the Pit.

Now, Gentlemen, _Match_ your Cock Carefully, or what you have hitherto
done, is nothing. And here Observe the _Length_, and _Strength_ of
Cocks. The _Length_ is thus known: Gripe the Cock by the Waste, and make
him shoot out his Legs, and in this Posture compare, _And have your
Judgment about you._ The _Strength_ is known by this Maxime, _The
largest in the Garth, is the strongest Cock._ The Dimension of the
_Garth_, is thus known: Gripe the Cock about from the joynts of your
Thumb, to the points of your Great _Finger_, and you will find the
Disadvantage. _The weak long _Cock_ is the quickest easier Riser, and
the short strong one, the surest Striker._

Thus being well Matcht, accoutre him for the Pit. Clip his _Main_ off
close to his Neck, from his head to his shoulders. Clip his _Tail_ close
to his _Rump_, the Redder it appears the better. His _Wings_ sloping,
with sharp Points [ware Eye Adversary:] Scrape smooth, and sharpen his
_Spurs_; leave no feathers on his Crown; then moisten his head with
Spittle; and now favour us Fortune.


The Battle done search, and suck your Cocks wounds, and wash them well
with hot _Urine_, then give him a Roll of your best Scowring, and stove
him for that Night. If he be swelled, the next morning, suck and bathe
his Wounds again, and pounce them with the Powder of the Herb _Robert_,
thro a fine Bag; give him an handfull of Bread in warm Urine, and stove
him, till the swelling be down. If he be hurt in his Eye, chew a little
ground _Ivy_, and Spit the Juice in it; which is good for _Films_,
_Haws_, _Warts_, &c. Or if he hath _veined_ himself in his fight, by
narrow striking, or other cross blows, when you have found the hurt,
bind the soft Down of Hare to it, will cure it.

When you visit your wounded _Cocks_, a month or two after you have put
them to their Walks, if you find about their heads any swollen Bunches,
hard and blackish at one end, then there are unsound Cores undoubtedly
in them; therefore open them, and with your Thumb crush them out, suck
out the Corruption, and fill the holes with fresh Butter; and that will
infallibly cure them.


_Cures for Distempers incident to the Cock or Chick of the Game._

For _Lice_, being most common, I begin with; proceeding from corrupt
Meat, and want of Bathing, _&c._ Take _Pepper_ beaten to Powder, mix it
with warm Water, and wash them with it.

For the _Roup_; a filthy swelling on the Rump, and very contagious to
the whole body, the staring and turning back of the Feathers is it
Symptome. Pull away the Feathers, open and thrust out the Core, and wash
the Sore with Water and Salt, or Brine.

For the _Pip_; visit the mouth, and examine what hinders your _Cocks_,
_Hen_, or _Chicks_ feeding, and you’ll find a white thin Scale on the
Tip of the Tongue, which pull off with your Naile, and rubbing the
Tongue with Salt, will cure it.

For the _Flux_; proceeding from eating too moist Meat, give them
Pease-Bran scalded, will stop it.

For the _Stoppage of the Belly_, that they cannot mute; Anoint their
Vents, and give them either small bits of Bread or Corn, steep’d in
Urine of Man.

For the _Eyes_, I have spoken before, and refer you to that; and for
other Infirmities, let Practise be your Directory.


And now I have one Word of Advice to him that is a Lover (or would be
so) of this _Royal-Sport_; and then have done: _Come not to the Pitt
without Money in your Breeches, and a Judgment of Matches_; +Done+ and
+Done+ is _Cock-Pitt_ +Law+, and if you venture beyond your Pocket, you
must look well to it, or you may loose an Eye by the Battle.

Thus much for _Cock-Fighting_.




Of Fowling.


This is a Recreation so full of _Variety_; that it would take up a great
many _Words_ and _Time_ to discover it; but varying indeed from this
Design, I shall not dilate on its several parts, but as succinctly as
may be, give you some methodical _Instructions_, as may make a man
capable of the _Active_ as well as _Passive_ part of this Pleasure, and
without the one he cannot have the other.

Now then the _Ingenious Fowler_, like a Politick and sagacious Warrior,
must first furnish and store himself with those several Stratagems and
Engines, as suit with the diversities of _Occasion_ (_i. e. Time_,)
_Place_, and _Game_; or else he cannot expect the _Conquest_.

And first of _Nets_, which must be made of the best pack-thread, and for
taking _Great Fowl_, the Meshes must be large, two Inches at least from
point to point, the larger the better; (provided the Fowle creep not
through;) two Fathom _deep_, and six in _Length_, is the best and most
manageable Proportion; Verged with strong Cord on each side, and
extended with long Poles at each end made on purpose. But for small
_Water-Fowle_; Let your Nets be of the smallest and strongest
Pack-thread, the Meshes so big, as for the great Fowle, about two or
three foot deep: Line these on both sides with false Nets, every Mesh a
foot and half Square. For the _Day-Net_, it must be made of fine
Pack-thread, the Mesh an inch square, three Fathom long, and one broad,
and extended on Poles according to its Length, as aforesaid.

_Birdlime_ is the next, and thus made. Pill the _Bark of Holly_ from the
Tree at _Midsummer_, fill a Vessel, and put to it running Water; boile
it over the fire till the _Grey_ and _White Bark_ rise from the _Green_;
take it off the fire, draine the Water well away, and seperate the
Barks; and take the Green, lay it on some moist floor and close place,
and cover it with _Hemblocks_, _Docks_, _Thistles_, and all manner of
Weeds; let it lye a fortnight, and in that time it will rot, and turn to
a filthy slimy Substance: Then put it into a Morter, beat it till you
perceive not what it was; take it out and wash it soundly at some
running stream, till the Foulness is gone: Then put it in a close
Earthen pot; let it stand four or five dayes, look to its Purging, and
scum it: When clean, put it into another Earthen Pot, and keep it close
for Use.

Your _Setting-Dog_ comes next, and sayes you must _Elect_ and _Train_
him thus: He must be of exquisite Scent, and love naturally to hunt
Feathers. The _Land-Spaniel_ is best, being of good nimble size, and
couragious mettle, which you may know by his Breed; being of a good
Ranger, _&c._

Having chosen your Dog, begin to _instruct_ him at half a Year old.
First make him familiar and acquainted well with your self above others,
by feeding him your self, alwayes going abroad with you, and correcting
him with _Words_ not Blows. So that he will follow none but you,
distinguish your Frowns from smiles, rough from smooth Words.

The first Lesson is, to make him _Crouch and lie down_ close to the
ground; and this is done by frequent laying him on the ground and crying
_Lye close_; upon his doing well reward him with Bread; and on the
contrary chastise him with Words, not Blows.

Next, To _creep to you with his Body and Head close upon the ground_, by
saying, _Come nearer, Come nearer_, or the like Words; to understand and
do it, entice him with shewing him Bread, or the like: Thrusting down
any rising part of his Body or head, and roughly threatning him; if he
slight that, a good Jerk or two with a slash of Whip-cord will reclaim
his Obstinacy. Repeat his Lessons, and incourage his well doing. And
this you may exercise in the Fields as you walk, calling him from his
busie Ranging to his _Duty_. And then teach him to follow you close at
the heels in a Line or string, without straining.

By this time he is a year old, now (the season fit) into the Field, and
let him _range_, [obediently.] If he wantonly babble or causelesly open,
correct him by biting soundly the Roots of his Ears, or Lashing. Assoon
as you find he approaches the Haunt of the _Partridge_, known by his
Whining, and willing, but not daring, to open, speak and bid him, _Take
heed_: If notwithstanding this he rush in and _Spring_ the _Partridge_,
or opens, and so they escape, correct him severely. Then cast him off to
another Haunt of a _Covie_, and if he mends his Error, and you take any
by drawing your Net over them swiftly, reward them with the Heads,
Necks, and Pinions.

As for the _Water-Dog_, the Instructions above for the _Setter_ will
serve; only to fetch and bring by loosing a Glove, or the like, is every
mans common Observation, and therefore shall here for Brevities sake
omit; only keep a strict Subjection in him, and Observance to your
Commands.

I shall say something too of the _Fowling-Piece_ and _Stalking-Horse_,
and then to your sports. The longest _Barrel is the best Fowling-Peice_,
five and half, or six foot long, with an indifferent Bore, under an
_Harquebuse_; and shooting with the Wind, and side-wayes, or behind the
Fowl, not in their faces, is to be observed; having your Dog in Command
not to stir till you have shot.

A _Stalking-Horse_ for shelter, to avoid being seen by the shie Fowle,
is an old Jade trained on purpose; but this being rare and troublesome,
have recourse to Art, to take Canvas, stuft and painted in the shape of
a Horse grazing, and so light that you may carry him on one hand (not
too bigg:) Others do make them in the shape of _Ox_, _Cow_, for Variety;
and _Stag_, _Trees_, _&c._

Thus being provided with necessary Engines for prosecuting and effecting
so cunning and pleasant a work, _Let’s abroad_; and let not the
_Ale-House_, _Tavern_, or _Brothel-Houses_, debauch and benumn our
Spirits, but let us with the Fowler exhilerate our Minds, refresh our
Bodies, & for a little Pains reap a great deal of Pleasure &
Satisfaction, whet our Appetites, and get Meat too for them.

Now then according to my proposed Method, let us first examine _Where_
to find our Game? that is, The _Haunts of Fowle_, whether _Land_ or
_Water_ Fowle; by which two Characters I distinguish them, because of
their Variety and Multiplicity.

The _greater Fowle_, or those who _divide the Foot_, reside by shallow
Rivers sides, Brooks and Plashes of Water; and in low and boggy places,
and sedgie, Marish, rotten Grounds. They also delight in the dry parts
of drowned Fens, overgrown with long Reeds, Rushes and Sedges; as
likewise in half-drowned Moors, hollow Vales of Downs, Heaths, _&c._
Where obscurely they may lurk under the Shelter of Hedges, Hills,
Bushes, _&c._

The _Lesser_, or Web-footed, _Fowle_, allwayes haunt drowned Fens, as
likewise the main streams of Rivers not subject to Freeze, the deeper
and broader, the better; (tho of these the _Wild-Goose_ and _Barnacle_,
if they cannot sound the depth, and reach the Ouze, change their
Residence for shallow places, and delight in Green-Winter-Corn,
especially if the Lands ends have Water about them:) _Small Fowle_ also
frequent hugely little Brooks, Ponds, drowned Meadows, Pastures, Moors,
Plashes, Meres, Loughs, and Lakes, stored with unfrequented Islands,
Shrubs, _&c._


_How to take all manner of Fowl or Birds._

For taking the first (I mean the greater _Fowle_) with _Nets_, observe
in general this: Come two hours before their feeding hours, Morning and
Evening; and spreading your Net on the Ground smooth and flat, stake the
two lower ends firm, and let the upper ends be extended on the long
Cord; of which the further end must be fastned to the ground, three
Fathom from the Net, the stake in a direct Line with the lower Verge of
the Net; the other, ten or twelve fathoms long, have in your hand at the
aforesaid distance, and get some shelter of Art or Nature, to keep you
from the curious and shie Eye of your Game; having your Net so ready
that the least pull may do your work, Strew’d over with Grass as it lies
to hide it: A live _Herne_, or some other Fowle lately taken, according
to what you seek for, will be very requisite for a _Stale_. And you will
have sport from the Dawning, till the Sun is about an hour high; but no
longer; and from Sun-set till Twilight; these being their feeding times.

For the _small_ (Water) _Fowle_. Observe the Evening is best before
Sun-set. Stake down your Nets on each side the River half a foot within
the Water, the lower part so plumb’d as to sink no further; the upper
slantwise shoaling against, but not touching by two foot, the Water, and
the Strings which bear up this upper side fastned to small yeilding
sticks prickt in the Bank, that as the Fowle strike may ply to the Nets
to entangle them. And thus lay your Nets (as many as you please) about
twelve score one from another, as the River or Brook will afford. And
doubt not your success. To expedite it however, a _Gun_ fired three or
four times in the _Fens_ and _Plashes_, a good distance from your Nets,
will affright and post them to your Snares; and so do at the _Rivers_,
when you lay in the _Fens_. Thus much in general for _Nets_, I come next
to _Bird-Lime_.

_Winter time_ is the most proper for taking all manner of _Small Birds_,
as flocking then promiscuously together, _Larks_, _Lennets_,
_Chaffinches_, _Goldfinches_, _Yellow-Hammers_, &c. with this
_Bird-lime_, made as afore-spoken; only additionally thus ordered. Put
to a quarter of a pound of _Bird-lime_, an Ounce of fresh _Lard_, or
_Capons-grease_, and let it gently melt together over the Fire, but not
Boyl; then take a quantity of _Wheat-ears_, as you think your use shall
require, and cut the straw about a foot long besides the Ears, and from
the Ear _Lime_ the straw Six inches; the warmer it is, the less
discernable it will be: Then to the _Field_ adjacent, carrying a bag of
Chaff, and thresh’d Ears, scatter them twenty Yards wide, and stick the
_lim’d Ears_ (declining downwards) here, and there; Then traverse the
_Fields_, disturb their _Haunts_, they will repair to your Snare, and
pecking at the Ears, finding they stick to them, mount; and the _Lim’d_
straws, lapping under their Wings, dead their flight, they cannot be
disengaged, but fall and be taken they must. Do not go near them, till
they rise of their own accord, and let not five or six entangled lead
you to spoyl your Game, and incur the loss of five or six dozen.
_Barn-doors_, _Thatcht-Houses_, and such like places, are excellent too
for the use of these _Lime-straws_. _A Clap- Net_, and _Lanthorn_, in a
dark night rub’d at the Eaves of Houses, is a common practice.

_Lime-Twigs_, is another Expedient for taking of Great _Fowle_, being
Rods that are long, small, straight, and pliable, the upper part (apt to
play to and fro) being besmeared with _Bird-lime_ warm. Thus to be used,
Observe the Haunts of the _Fowle_, have a _Stale_, (a living Fowle of
the same kind you would take) and cross pricking your Rods, one into,
and another against the Wind sloping, a foot distant one from the other,
pin down your _Stale_, some distance from them, tying some small string
to him, to pull and make him flutter to allure the _Fowle_ down. If any
be caught, do not run presently upon them, their fluttering will
encrease your Game. A well taught _Spaniel_ is not amiss to retake those
that are entangled, and yet flutter away. Thus likewise for the _Water_,
consult the Rivers depth, and let your Rods be proportionable; what is
_Limed_ of them being above the Water, and a _Mallard_, &c. as a _Stale_
placed here and there, as aforesaid. You need not wait on them, but
three times a day visit them, and see your _Game_; if you miss any Rods
(therefore know their Number) some Fowle entangled is got away with it,
into some Hole, _&c._ and here your _Spaniel_ will be serviceable to
find him.

For _Small-Birds_, a _Lime-bush_ is best; thus, Cut down a great Bough
of a _Birch_, or _Willow-Tree_, trim it clean, and _Lime_ it handsomely,
within four fingers of the bottom: Place this _Bush_ so ordered, in some
quick-set, or dead _Hedge_, in _Spring_ time: In _Harvest_, or _Summer_,
in _Groves_, _Bushes_, _Hedges_, _Fruit-Trees_, _Flax_, and
_Hemp-Lands_: In _Winter_, about _Houses_, _Hovells_, _Barns_, _Stacks_,
&c. A _Bird-Call_ is here also necessary, or your own industrious skill
in the Notes of several Birds. _Lime-twigs_ are likewise used, stuck on
_Hemp-cocks_, which take vast Numbers of _Lennets_, and _Green-Birds_,
that love that _Diet_. An _Owle_ placed near your _Lime-twigs_, is
likewise an Excellent _Stale_, for being persecuted by all other
_Birds_, they flock about him, and dye with Hatred; I mean, being taken
by you, in their eager, and malicious Persecution of poor _Tom_. Some
have Natural, others Artificial _Owles_, and with either fear not
Success. And thus you may do, in any particular _Game_, with your
_Twigs_, and _Stale_ of the same kind, as, _Snipes_, _Felfares_,
_Pigeons_, &c.

And here I must not forget the _Farmers_ Advantage, to destroy his
_Corn_-destroyers, _Rooks_, but give him this Advice: Take some thick
_Brown-paper_, divide a sheet into Eight parts, and make them into the
fashion of _Sugar-Loaves_; _Lime_ them a little in the inside, and put
some _Corn_ in them (if in _Ploughing_ time, _Wormes_, and _Maggots_)
lay _Three_ or _Four Score_ up and down the Land, under (if you can)
some Clod, early, before feeding time: Be at some distance, and behold
the ensuing Sport. Your _Pigeons_, _Rooks_, _Crows_, &c. comeing to pick
out the _Corn_ or _Worms_, the _Pyramidal-snare_ hangs on their heads,
they fly straight upright, almost out of sight, and as if some _Gun_ in
the Ayr had met with them, down they come tumbling (being spent) and
become your Prey.

Thus much in general of taking all manner of _Fowle_, by _Net_, or
_Lime_, I come next to know their best Seasons, when to use them, and
the first (the _Net_) is from the beginning of _May_, to the latter end
of _October_; and the last (the _Lime_) in the _Winter_ only, beginning
from _November_, and ending at _May_, in which times, there being no
Leaves, your _Lime-Bushes_, and _Branches_ of _Trees_ are of one and the
same Hue.

And because Gentlemen who have _Fish-ponds_, wonder they loose so many
_Fish_, and are apt to Censure sometimes undeservedly their Neighbours,
when it is the insatiable _Hern_, that is the true cause: I shall next
lay down the best and most approved way of taking the great
_Fish-devouring Herne_, whose _Haunt_ having found, observe this Method
to take him. Get three or four small _Roaches_, or _Dace_, take a strong
_Hook_, (not too rank) with Wyre to it, and draw the Wyre just within
the skin, from the side of the _Gills_, to the _Taile_ of the said
_Fish_, and he will live four or five dayes, (if dead, the _Herne_ will
not touch it.) Then having a strong Line, of a dark-_Green-Silk_,
twisted with Wyre, about three yards long, tye a round stone of a pound
to it, and lay three or four such hooks, but not too deep in the Water,
out of the _Herne’s_ wading; and two or three Nights will answer your
Expectation.

And here I thought to conclude this Discourse of _Fowling_, but the
young _Tyro_ or _Beginner_ in the Acquest of this Noble Art, pulls me
back again, and whispers this Question in my Ear, How to take
_Pheasants_, _Partridges_, &c. in particular, by either of the
forementioned wayes, as, _Nets_, _Lime_, _Engine_, _Driving_, or
_Setting_; because of all _Fowl_ for _Game_, these two are esteemed as
the most Gentile, and Profitable? I shall answer his Curiosity, and for
his Instruction, propose these ensuing Rules, though what I have said in
general of Great _Fowl_ might suffice.


_The severall wayes of taking _Pheasants_._

For to take _Pheasants_ with _Nets_, first find their _Haunts_, or
_Coverts_, which are generally in thick, young, well-grown _Copses_,
solitary and untraced by Men or Cattle, and not in Old High _Woods_; and
never in open _Fields_. Which having assured knowledge of, the next
thing is to find out the _Eye_, or _Brood_ of _Pheasants_, wich
according to the best Experience is thus. You must learn and understand
the several Notes of a Natural _Pheasant-Call_, and how usefully to
apply them. In the Morning just before, or at _Sun-rising_, call them to
feed, and so at _Sun-setting_: In the _Forenoon_, and _Afternoon_, your
Note must be to Cluck them together to _Brood_, or to chide them for
straggling, or to notify some danger at hand.

Thus skilled in their _Notes_, and by the Darkness, Solitaryness, and
strong undergrowth of the place assured of their _Haunts_, closely lodge
your self, and softly at first call; lest being near you, a loud _Note_
affright them; and no Reply made, raise your _Note_ gradually, to the
highest; and if there be a _Pheasant_ in hearing, he will answer you,
in as loud a _Note_. Be sure it be Tunable. As soon as you are answered,
creep nearer to it; if far off, and a single _Fowl_, as you call, and
approach, so will the _Pheasant_. Having gotten sight of her, on the
_Ground_, or _Perch_, cease calling, and with all silence possible,
spread your _Net_ conveniently, between the _Pheasant_, and you, one end
of the _Net_ fastned to the _Ground_, and the other end, hold by a long
Line in your hand, by which you may pull it together, if strained; then
call again, and as you see the _Pheasant_ come under your _Net_, rise
and shew your self, and affrighting her, she will mount, and so is
taken. Thus if on the contrary you have divers _Answers_, from several
_Corners_ of the _Coppice_, and you keep your place and not stir, they
will come to your Call, and then having a pair of _Nets_, spread one on
each side, and do as before. Your _Nets_ must be made of _Green_ or
_Black_ double-twin’d _Thread_, the _Mesh_ about an inch square, between
_Knot_, and _Knot_, the whole _Net_ about three _Fathom_ long, and Seven
_Foot_ broad, verged with strong small Cord on each side and ends, to
lye hollow and compass-wise.

The next way of taking _Pheasant-Powts_, is by _Driving_ thus. Having
found the _Haunt_ of an _Eye of Pheasants_, known by the _Barrenness_ of
the place, _Mutings_ and loose Feathers, then in the little Pads and
Wayes, like Sheep-tracks, they have made, place your Nets (taking the
wind with you) a-cross these Paths, hollow, loose and circularly, the
nether part fixt to the ground, and the upper side hollow, _&c._ as
aforesaid: Then to their _Haunt_, and there _call_ them together,
if scattered; then with a _Driver_, an Instrument like that of
_Cloath-dressers_, rake gently the Bushes and Boughs about you, the
_Powts_ will run, and stop and listen; then give a nother rake, and so
you will drive them like sheep into your Nets: Observe in this
_Secrecy_, _Time_ and _Leisure_, or you spoyl your sport; _Secrecy_ in
concealing your self from being seen by them; and _Time_ and _Leisure_,
by not being too hasty.

Lastly for taking _Pheasants_ with the _Lime-Bush_, or Rods, order
these, as I have before prescribed; your Rods about twelve Inches long,
and your Bush containing not above eight Twigs, with a pretty long
Handle, sharpned to stick in the Ground, or Bushes, Shrubs, _&c._ and
let it be planted as near the _Pheasants pearching Branch_, as may be.
Place your Rods on the Ground, near the Bush; which will help the Bush;
for when some are taken below by the Rods, they will scare up the others
to get on the Bushes to seek what’s become of their Fellows, and there
become your Prey themselves. Thus provided, keep close not to be
discovered; out with your Call, and use it _Skilfully_ and well, and you
need not fear Game. Number the Rods you planted, and if any be missing,
some _Pheasant_ is crept away with it, and here let your Spaniel be
employed to serve you in finding out the last sanctuary of the poor
_Pheasant_, thus shunning his inevitable Captivity and Death.


_For taking Partridge._

As in all the foregoing Sports, the _Place_ where to find them is our
first Enquiry, so here (as you did of the _Pheasant_) you must first
find the _Partridges Haunt_. Which is mostly in standing-Corn-Fields,
where they breed; as likewise in Stubble after the Corn is cut,
especially Wheat-stubble till it is trodden, and then they repair to
Barley-Stubble, if fresh; and the Furrows amongst the Clots, Brambles
and long Grass, are sometimes their lurking places, for Twenty and
upward in a Covy. In the _Winter_ in up-land Meadows, in the dead Grass
or Fog under Hedges, among Mole-Hills; or under the Roots of Trees,
_&c._ Various and uncertain are their _Haunts_. And tho some by the
_Eye_, by distinguishing their Colour from the ground, others by the
_Ear_, by hearing the Cock call earnestly the Hen, and the Hens
answering, and chattering with Joy at meeting, do find _Partridge_; yet
the best, easiest and safest way of finding them is (as you do the
_Pheasant_) by the Call or Pipe; applying your Notes seasonable, as
before prescribed, and they will come near to you, and you may count
their Numbers, and to your sport.

Surround your Covy, prepare your Nets, and pricking a stick fast in the
ground, tye the one end to it, and let your Nets fall as you walk
briskly round without stopping, and cover the _Partridge_; then rush in
upon them to frighten them, and as they rise they are taken.

For taking them with _Bird-Lime_, thus. Call first near the _Haunt_; if
answered, stick about your _Lime-Straws_ (of which I have spoken before)
a-cross in ranks two or three Lands, at some distance from you; then
call again, and as they approach you, they are intercepted by the
Straws; and to your Prey. This way is used most successfully in
Stubble-Fields, from _August_ to _September_: And Rods in Woods,
Pastures, _&c._ as for the _Pheasant_.

But lastly, above all (to omit all others) the most pleasant way of
taking Partridge is with a _Setting-Dog_ (of which I have spoken before
and refer you thither) who having set them, (known by the already
mentioned signs) use your Net, as you have heard just now: And by these
Rules and Method, the _Railes_, _Quailes_, _Moorpootes_, _&c._ are to be
taken; and are for _Hawks_ flight too. And here I must make an end of
the most material part of _Fowling_.

For as for treating of all manner of _Singing Birds_, their _Taking_,
which in general hath been before observed, their _Preserving_ and
_Keeping_, their _Natural Breeding_ and _Feeding_, is a Work of such
common Observation, and so differing from the Design of this Treatise of
_Violent_ and _Brisk Exercises_, that omitting it altogether here, shall
refer you to the Venders of them, whom you may meet with in every
Street, and furnish your self at easy rates; and are indeed but _Voces &
præterea Nihil_.

Thus much for _Fowling_.




Of Fishing.


So _Ancient_, so _Innocent_, so _Vertuous_, and so _Useful_ is this
Recreation, that all the foregoing Divertisements, must needs give place
to this, and however (inadvertently) it comes in here, challenges a
Preference, and Acceptance before any Pleasure can by the heart of Man
be desired. As for its _Antiquity_ some attribute its Knowledge to
_Belus_ Son of _Nimrod_, who first invented all Vertuous Sports; others
to _Seth_ and his Sons, he having left it on brazen Pillars engraven
with indelible Characters not to be obliterated by the ensuing Flood.
_Job_ makes mention of Fishing, who Lived as may be supposed before
_Moses_; nor is it questionable, whether the illustrious Patriarchs used
not this Recreation. Certain it is, there were many _Fishermen_ before
_Christs_ Coming, whose sole Dependance was on this Innocent Art.
_Innocent_ indeed and harmless, when the Lamb of God himself
_recommended_ it (as I may say) as such, by his Divine Call of four
_Fishermen_, to be his Disciples, and by distinguishing & dignifying
them with the greatest _Intimacy_ with himself, and chiefest place in
the _Apostolical Catalogue_; and by the Inspiration of his Spirit
ennobled their Function; he made them Eminent _Fishers of men_. Nay, at
the expence of a _Miracle_, he shewed the _Lawful Use_ of Fishing, when
the mouth of _Peter’s_ Fish he commanded him to take, was the
_Tribute-Money’s Purse_. And why our Saviour made his first Election of
Fishermen, before others, this may be the undoubted Reason: Because he
knew such men were naturally of more Contemplative and Serene Minds, of
more Calme, Peaceable, and sweet Dispositions; And let me add too in the
next place, because it is the School of Vertue (as I may call it)
wherein the Primitive Christian Vertues are learnt and exercised.
_Patience_ is the immediate Vertue wherewith the _Angler_ is endued,
without which the Pleasure doth no longer exist; and attended with her
three Sisters compleat his Delight. For _Justice_ directs him to the due
Place of Sport, where he may freely exercise his Art, without Injury or
Incivility to his Neighbours: _Temperance_ prescribes a _Measure_ to the
Action, and moderates and rules the Affections. And lastly _Fortitude_
encourages and strengthens his mind, to support the Labour and undergo
with Perseverance all Disappointments, excludes _Passion_ (incident to
other Recreations,) at the loss of a Hook, or (perhaps that he never
had) a Fish. It makes him not fear Wind nor Weather, nor is his delight
sowered at last with _Melancholy_ and Vexation; but tho the Anglers
Reward is but a little Fish, for a great deal of Pains, the Contentment
and Satisfaction is above that. Finally the _Usefulness_ of it is
apparently great; for the cherishing the Body, and cheering the Mind,
for diverting Sadness, and calming unquiet Thoughts, for moderating
Passions and procuring Contentedness, and begetting Peace and Patience
in those that profess and practise it. It has been the Recreation of
Gods Saints, and Holy Fathers; and of many Worthy and Reverend Divines,
this hath been and is now their beloved Pastime. And so I shall conclude
this _Encomium_ of Fishing; Volumes may be written in its praise (in
which I am something wanting in the other foregoing Sports, this
claiming it as its just due above the rest) but I long to tell you
_How_, _When_ and _Where_, you may taste its Delight.


It hath been the Method of this whole Treatise, to divide the several
distinct Heads of each Recreation into three Parts, to render the
Observations and Rules the more plain and easy, for the prosecuting the
Recreation we treat of.

1. _What_ it is we pursue.

2. _Where_ and _When_ to find that we would delight our selves in.

3. _With what_ proper _Mediums_ or Measures we may obtain the desired
Effects of our endeavours therein. And in this delightful Scene of
Pastime, we now treat of, Fishing, so full of Variety and Choice,
I shall observe the same Method.


First then, _What_ we pursue is Fish, distinguished according to their
sundry kinds by these following _Names_.

  The _Barbel_, _Breame_, _Bleak_, _Bulhead_, or Millers-Thumb;
  _Chevin_, _Char_, _Chub_, _Carp_; _Dace_, _Dare_; _Eel_; _Flounder_;
  _Grayling_, _Gudgeon_, _Guiniad_; _Loach_; _Minnow_; _Pope_ or
  _Pike_, _Pearch_; _Rud_, _Roach_; _Sticklebag_ or Bansticle,
  _Salmon_, _Shad_, _Suant_; _Tench_, _Torcoth_, _Trout_, _Thwait_,
  and _Umber_. All these Alphabetically thus named are the different
  sorts of Fish, in taking which the Angler commonly exercises his
  Art. We come next, _Where_ to find them.

I. To know the _Haunts_ and Resorts of Fish, in which they are to be
usually found, is the most Material thing the Angler ought to be
instructed in, lest he vainly prepare _how to take_ them, and
preposterously seek _where to find_ that he prepared for. To prevent
which you are first to understand, That as the Season of the Year is, so
_Fish_ change their places: In _Summer_, some keep near the Top, others
the bottom of the Waters. In _Winter_, all _Fish_ in general resort to
deep Waters. But more particularly,

The _Barbel_, _Roach_, _Dace_, and _Ruff_, covet most _Sandy, Gravelly
Ground_, the deepest part of the _River_, and the Shadows of _Trees_.

_Breame_, _Pike_, and _Chub_, delight in a _Clay_, and _Ouzie Ground_:
The _Bream_ chooseth the middle of the _River_, in a gentle not too
rapid Stream: The _Pike_ prefereth still Waters, full of _Fry_, and
absconding himself amongst _Bull-Rushes_, _Water-docks_, or under
_Bushes_, that under these shelters he may more securely surprize and
seize his Prey: The _Chub_ too chooses the same Ground, large Rivers and
Streams, and is rarely destitute of some Tree to cover and shade him.

_Carp_, _Tench_ and _Eel_, frequent foul muddy still Waters. The
_greatest Eels_ lurk under Stones, or Roots; the _smallest_ ones are
found in all sorts of Rivers or Soyls: The _Carp_ is for the deepest
stillest part of Pond or River, and so is the _Tench_, and both delight
in green Weeds.

_Pearch_ delighteth in gentle Streams of a reasonable Depth, not too
shallow; close by a Hollow Bank is their common Sanctuary.

_Gudgeon_ covets Sandy, Gravelly, Gentle Streams, and smaller Rivers;
not so much abounding in Brooks. He bites best in Spring, till they
spawn, and a little after till _Wasp_ time.

The _Salmon_ delights in large swift Rivers, which ebb and flow; and are
there plentifully to be found: As likewise Rocky and Weedy Rivers. But
in the latter end of the Year he is to be found high up in the Country,
in swift and violent Cataracts, coming thither to spawn.

The _Trout_ loves small swift purling Brooks or Rivers, that run upon
Stones or Gravel, and in the swiftest deepest part of them, getteth
behind some Stone-Block and there feeds. He delights in a Point of a
River where the Water comes Whirling like the Eddy, to catch what the
Stream brings down, especially if he has the Shade of a Tree: He hugely
delights to lurk under some hollow Bank or Stone; seldom among Weeds.

_Shad_, _Thwait_, _Plaice_, _Peel_, _Mullet_, _Suant_ and _Flownder_,
covet chiefly to be in or near the Salt or Brackish Waters, which ebb
and flow: The last, _viz._ the _Flownder_, have been taken in fresh
Rivers, as coveting Sand and Gravel, deep gentle streams, near Banks,
_&c._

Lastly the _Umber_ affects Marly Clay Ground, clear and swift Streams,
far from the Sea; the greatest Plenty of these Fish is found in
_Derbyshire_ and _Staffordshire_.

Thus much for the _Haunts_ of Fish; I come next to know _When_ is the
most _seasonable time_ to catch them; which before I speak to, let him
that would become a compleat Angler, take this Rule. That he observe
narrowly what Pond or River soever he fisheth in, whether it be slimy,
muddy, stoney or gravelly; whether of a swift or slow Motion; As
likewise that he know the Nature of each Fish, and what Baits are most
proper for every kind: Not to let his Knowledg be circumscribed to one
or two particular Rivers, whither he is invited to Angle and take his
Observations by the Vicinity of his House; but to let his Knowledge be
_general_, and consequently his Sport will be so too. His Ignorance
otherwise will oblige him to be a Spectator in another River, when his
Excellency is confined to that only experienced one in or near his own
Parish or House. But to proceed,

II. To understand the best _Time when_ to Angle in, We must first
consider Affirmatively, when most _Seasonable_: Or, 2. Negatively, when
_Unseasonable_.

1. _Seasonable_ Angling is, When the Weather is calme, serene and clear;
tho the Cool cloudy Weather in Summer is to be preferred, provided the
Wind blow not too boistrously, to hinder your easy Guiding your Tools;
In the hottest Months the cooler the better.

2. When a Violent shower hath disturbed the Water and mudded it, then
with a _Red Worm_, Angle in the Stream at the ground.

3. A little before Fish spawn, when they repair to Gravely Fords to rub
and loosen their full Bellies; they bite freely.

4. From Sun-rising till eight of the Clock in the Morning, and from four
in the Afternoon till night for _Carp_ and _Tench_. In _June_ and
_July_, _Carps_ shew themselves on the very rim of the Water, then Fish
with a _Lob-Worm_, as you would with a Natural Flye. But be sure to keep
out of sight.

5. In _March_, _April_, and _September_, and all _VVinter_, when the Air
is clear, serene and warm. And after a showre of Rain, which hath only
beaten the _Gnats_, and _Flies_ into the _River_, without muddying. The
two first mentioned Months with _May_, and part of _June_, are most
proper for the _Fly_; _Nine_ in the Morning, and _Three_ a Clock in the
Afternoon, is the best time; as likewise, when the _Gnats_ play much in
a warm Evening.

6. In a _Cloudy_, and _VVindy_ day, after a _Moon-shine_ clear Night,
for the brightness of the Night (through fear) making them abstain from
feeding, and the Gloominess of the Day emboldening and rendering them
(through Hunger) sharp, and eager upon food, they bite then freely.

7. _Lastly_, At the opening of _Mill-dams_ or _Sluces_, you will find
_Trouts_, &c. come forth seeking food, brought down by the Water. We
come next to demonstrate the time not proper, _i. e._

2. _Unseasonable_ Angling in short is, When the Earth is parched, and
scorched with Vehement _Heat_, and _Drought_; benummed and frozen with
_Cold_, _Frost_, and _Snow_; or refrigerated with Spring _Hoar-Frosts_;
or blasted with the sharp, bitter, nipping, _North_, or _East_ Winds: Or
when blustring _Boreas_ disorders your well guiding your Tackling; or
the _Sheep-Shearers Washings_ glutted the _Fish_, and anticipated your
_Bait_; when the withdrawing of your sport, foretells a Storm, and
advises you to some shelter; or Lastly, when the night proves Dark, and
Cloudy, you need not trouble your self the next day, ’tis to no purpose,
_&c._

Thus much shall suffice for the two first Parts I proposed to treat of,
_viz._ What we seek after in this Recreation, and Where, and When to
find it; I come next to speak of the several _Implements_, and
_Tackling_ we ought to be provided with, for the prosecuting the same;
and then to our Sport.

III. For providing _Stocks_, the best time is the Winter _Solstice_,
when the Sap is in the Roots of Trees, and their Leaves gone. It is
improper after _January_, the Sap then ascending into the Trunk, and
expanding it self over all the Branches. See that your Stocks be
_Taper-grown_, and your Tops of the best _Ground-Hazle_, that can be
had, smooth, slender, and straight, of an Ell-long, pliant, and bending;
and yet of a strength, that a reasonable jerk cannot break it, but it
will return to its first straightness; lest otherwise you endanger your
Line. Keep them two full years, before you use them; having preserved
them from Worm-eating, or Rotting, by thrice a year rubbing and chaffing
them well with Butter (if sweet) or Linsed or Sallet-Oyl; and if Bored,
Oyl poured into the Holes, and bathed four and twenty houres in it, and
then thrown out again, will exceedingly preserve them.

But why should I further trouble my self with prescribing any Rules for
the ordering the Angle-Rod, since every Cane-shop in _London_ will
furnish us at an easy rate, with Rods of Cane, that shall suit with the
sport we designe; the usual Objection of their _Colour_ and Stiffness
being taken away, the first by covering it with Parchment or thin
Leather, dyed as you please; and the other by the length and strength of
the Top, being as before.

The next thing we come to prepare is the _Line_, which though easy, yet
admits of some Rule; wherefore to make it neat, handsome and strong,
twist the Hair you make it of _even_, having seen if the Hair be of an
equal bigness; then steep your Line in Water, to see if the Hairs
shrink, if so, you must twist them over again. The _Colour_ of the Hair
is best of _Sorrel_, _White_ and _Grey_; Sorrel for muddy boggy Rivers,
and the two last for clear Waters. Nor is the _Pale watry green_
contemptible, dyed thus: Take a pint of strong _Ale_, half a pound of
_Soot_, a little of the Juice of _Walnut-Leaves_ and _Allum_; Boyle
these together in a Pipkin half an hour, take it off, and when ’tis
cold, put in your Hair. In making your Line of Hair mix not Silk; but
either all Hair, or all Silk; as likewise distinguish the Line for the
Ground Angle, and that for the Fly-Rod, the last must be stronger than
the first; in that for the Artificial Fly, making the uppermost Link
twenty Hairs long, less in the next, and so less till you come to the
Fly. Lastly at each end of your Line make a Loop (called a _Bow_) the
one _Larger_, to fasten to, and take it from the top of your Rod, and
the other _Lesser_ to hang your Hook-line on.

Your _Hook_ comes next, and requires your Care, That it be Long in the
shank, something Round in compass, the point straight and even, and
bending in the shank. Set on your Hook with strong small Silk, laying
your Hair on the inside of the Hook.

Your _Flote_ challenges divers wayes of making. Some using _Muscovy_
Duck-quills for still Waters. Others the best sound Cork without flaws
or holes, bored through with a hot Iron, and a Quill of a fit proportion
put into it; then pared into a pyramidal Form, or in the fashion of a
small Peare, to what bigness you please, and ground smooth with a
Grindstone or Pumice; this is best for strong Streams.

In fine, _To plum the Ground_, get a _Carbine_ Bullet bored through, and
in a strong twist hanged on your _Hook_ or Rod. To sharpen your _Hook_,
carry a little _Whetstone_. To carry your several Utensils without
incommoding your Tackle, have several _Partitions_ of Parchment. And in
short the Ingenious Angler will not be unprovided of his _Bob_ and
_Palmer_; his _Boxes_ of all sizes for his _Hooks_, _Corks_, _Silk_,
_Thread_, _Flies_, _Lead_, &c. His _Linnen_ and _Woollen Bait-Bags_; His
splinted _Osier light Pannier_; And lastly his _Landing Hook_, with a
Screw at the end to screw it into the socket of a Pole, & stricken into
the Fish, to draw it to Land: To which socket, a Hook to cut up the
Weeds, and another to pull out Wood, may be fastned.

But all those Implements I have described, serve to no purpose, if we do
not observe to have the _Agents_ and Effecters of our Pastime in store,
I mean proper _Baits_ and Inticements to take your Fish. Which branch
themselves into three Kinds.

First, The _Life-baits_, which are all kind of _Worms_, _Redworm_,
_Maggot_, _Dors_, _Froggs_, _Bobb_, _Brown-Flies_, _Grashoppers_,
_Hornets_, _Wasps_, _Bees_, _Snails_, small _Roaches_, _Bleak_,
_Gudgeon_, or _Loaches_.

Secondly, _Artificial living Baits_, of _Flyes_ of all sorts and shapes,
made about your Hooks with Silk and Feathers, at all times seasonable,
especially in blustering Weather.

Lastly, _Dead Baits_, Pasts of all maings, Wasps dryed or undryed,
clotted _Sheeps-blood_, _Cheese_, _Bramble-berries_, _Corn_, _Seeds_,
_Cherries_, &c. The two first good in _May_, _June_ and _July_, the two
next in _April_; and the last in the _Fall_ of the Leaf.


_Of Flies._

Of _Natural_ Flies there are innumerable, and therefore it cannot be
expected I can particularize all; but some of their Names I shall
nominate, _viz._ The _Dun-Fly_, _Red-Fly_, _May-Fly_, _Tawny-Fly_,
_Moor-Fly_, _Shell-Fly_, _Flag-Fly_, _Vine-Fly_, _Cloudy_ or
_Blackish-Fly_, _Canker-Flies_, _Bear-Flies_, _Caterpillars_, and
thousands more, differing according to the Soiles, Rivers or Plants.

_Artificial Flies_, are made by the ingenious Angler, according to Art,
in shape, colour and proportion like the Natural Fly, of _Fur_, _Wool_,
_Silk_, _Feathers_, &c. To delineate which I must confess my self not so
accurate and skilful a Painter, nor can any Pen-drawing illustrate their
Various Colours so, as to direct their Artificial Counterfeit; Nature
will help him in this by Observation, curiously Flourishing their
several Orient and bright Colours, after which they take their names,
as before said: And therefore to furnish your self with both Natural and
Artificial _Flyes_, repair in the morning to the River, and with a Rod
beat the Bushes that hang over the Water, and take your Choice; This is
a Rule whereby you may know by their Number what _Fly_ the Fish affect
most, and accordingly to use it; taking with you these following
Directions.

1. Observe to Angle with the Artificial _Fly_ in Rivers disturbed
somewhat by Rain, or in a Cloudy day, the Wind blowing gently: If the
Wind be not so high, but you may well guide your Tackle, in plain Deeps
is to be found the best Fish, and best Sport: If small Wind breeze, in
swift streams is best Angling: Be sure to keep your _Fly_ in perpetual
slow motion; and observe that the Weather suit the Colour of your _Fly_,
as the light Colour’d in a Clear day, the Darkish in a dark, _&c._ As
likewise according to the Waters Complexions, have your Fly suitable.

2. Let your Line be twice as long as your Rod: Keep as far as you can
from the Waterside, the Sun on your back; In casting your Fly, let that
fall first; your Line not touching the Water.

3. Have a nimble Eye, and active quick Hand to strike presently upon the
rising of the Fish, lest finding his mistake he spew out the Hook.

4. In slow Rivers cast your Fly cross them, let it sink a little, draw
it back gently, without breaking or circling the Water; let the Fly
float with the Current, and you will not fail of excellent Sport.

5. Observe to let the Wings of your _Salmon-Flys_ to be one behind
another, whether two or four, and they and the Tail long, and of the
finest gaudiest Colours you can choose.

_Lastly_, In clear Rivers a small _Fly_ with slender Wings is best, and
in muddied Rivers a Fly of a more than Ordinary large Body.


Thus much for Flies, I come next to that I called _Dead-Baits_, and
shall begin with the several Wayes of making Pastes.


_Of Pastes._

1. Beat in a Mortar the Leg of a young _Coney_ (Vulgarly called the
_Almond_) or of a Whelp or Catling, and a quantity of Virgins Wax and
_Sheeps_ suet, till they are incorporated, and temper them with
clarified _Honey_ into Paste.

2. _Sheeps_ Blood, _Cheese_, fine _Manchet_ and clarified _Honey_
tempered as before.

3. _Sheeps_-Kidney-Suet, _Cheese_, fine Flower, with clarified _Honey_
tempered.

4. _Cherries_, _Sheeps_ Blood, _Saffron_ and fine _Manchet_ made into a
Paste.

5. Beat into a Paste; the fattest Old _Cheese_, the strongest _Rennet_
can be got, fine _Wheat-flower_ and _Annis-seed_ Water: If for a _Chub_
you make the Paste, put a little rafty _Bacon_.

Lastly, _Mutton_-Kidney Suet, and _Turmerick_ reduced to a fine Powder,
the fattest old _Cheese_ and strongest _Rennet_, wrought to a Paste,
adding _Turmerick_, till the Paste be of a curious Yellow; and is
excellent and approved for _Chevin_.

All which Pastes when you use them, that you may have the desired
Effects of your Pains infallibly follow, anoint your Bait with this
Confection: Take the Oyl of _Aspray_, _Coculus India_, and _Assa Fœtida_
beaten, and mix with it as much Life-_Honey_; then dissolve them in the
Oyle of _Polypody_, and keep it in a close Glass for your use. And that
your Paste may not wash off your Hook, beat Cotten-Wool or Flax into it.


_Of keeping Baits._

For the keeping and preserving all quick Baits, you must keep them
separately as they are several, not altogether; and feed them with that
they most delight in; as for instance, in short:

The _Red-Worm_, must be kept in a bag of Red Cloth, with a handful of
chopt _Fennel_, mixt with half so much fresh, black and fertile Mould,
will scoure and preserve them: All other Worms, with the Leaves of Trees
they are bred on, renewing them often in a day. Only the _Cad-bait_,
_Bob_ and _Canker_, &c. must be kept in the same things you find them.

The great _White Maggots_, keep them in Sheeps-Tallow, or little bits of
a beasts Liver; and to scoure them, hang them warm in a bag of
Blanketing with Sand.

The _Frogs and Grasshoppers_, in wet Moss and long Grass, frequently
moistned; and when used, the Legs of the first, and the Wings of the
other must be cut close off.

The _Flies_ use them as you take them. Only the _Wasps_, _Hornets_ and
_Humble-Bee_, must be dryed in an Oven, their heads dipt in Sheeps
blood, and dryed again, may be kept in a Box for use.

Thus much shall suffice for the Anglers Tools and Baits, I shall now
lead him to his Sport, having first Clad himself with all inward and
outward Ornaments.

_Inward_, In having his Mind cloathed with these Qualifications, _viz._

1. _Learning_, throughly to understand his Art, and skilfully argue and
dispute its Excellency, _&c._

2. _Faith_, to enjoy the Benefit of his Expectation.

3. _Love_, to his Pleasure, not thinking it irksom and tedious, to his
Neighbour, in not offending him.

4. _Patience_, In not excruciating himself for Accidents of Losses,
_&c._

5. _Humility_, in wetting himself, lying down, kneeling, _&c._ as
Occasion requires.

6. _Liberality_, in dispencing to others the Fruits of his Labour.

_Outward_, In cloathing his body with plain and comely Apparel, of sad
dark Colours, as sad grayes, tawny, purple, hair or Musk Colour. Warm
and well lined, to prevent the Evils which the Coldness of the Air,
or Moistness of the Water may produce.

And now thus equipt let us walk to the Rivers side, there give me leave
to direct you in the _Measures_ you must take and observe, for the
obtaining the End of what all our forementioned Preparations aime at;
I mean the Catching those sundry kinds of Fish I enumerated at the
begining of this Discourse; and observing that first method, I shall
Alphabetically describe, what Baits are most Proper for taking them, and
How to use them.

To begin then with the _Barbel_. The best time for Angling for this Fish
is at the latter end of _May_, _June_, _July_, and beginning of
_August_, in his Haunts aforementioned; and the best Bait (omiting
others) is the well-scoured _Lob-Worm_ (being of a curious cleanly
Palate as well as shape) or Cheese steept an hour or two in clarified
Honey. He is a subtile Fish, extraordinary strong, and dogged to be
dealt with, and therefore be sure to have your Rod and Line strong and
long, or you may endanger to break it.

The _Breame_ is next in order; The most seasonable time to Angle for him
is from St. _James_ tide till _Bartholomew_ tide. He spawneth in _June_
or begining of _July_; is easily taken, as falling on his side after one
or two gentle turnes, and so drawn easily to Land. The best Bait for him
is that (most delightful to him) _Red-Worme_ (found in Commons &
_Chalky_ Grounds after Rain) at the root of a great _Dock_, wrapt up in
a round Clue. He loves also Paste, Flag-Wormes, Wasps, Green-Flies,
Butter-Flies, and a Grass-hopper, without Leggs.

Bait your Ground the night before with gross-ground Malt, boiled and
strained, and then in the morning with the Red-Worm, bait your Hook, and
plumbing your Ground within half an Inch, Fish.

The _Bleak_, an eager Fish, is caught with all sorts of Worms bred on
Trees or Herbs, also with _Flies_, _Cad-bait_, _Bobs_, _Paste_,
_Sheeps-Blood_, _White Snails_, _Wasps_, _Gnats_, &c. In a warm clear
day the small Flye at the rim of the Water is best; In a Cloudy day,
_Gentles_ or _Cadis_ two foot under the Water.

The _Bull-head_ or _Millers-thumb_, being Childrens Recreation, I shall
speak little of, only being serviceable for Baits, I shall only say he
is easily taken with a small Worm, being lazie and simple, and will
swallow any thing; and the _Minnow_, _Loach_, and _Bansticle_ being of
the same diet, I place here too.

The _Chevin_, loveth all sorts of _Worms_, _Flies_, _Cheese_, _Grain_,
and _Black Worms_, their Bellies being slit, that the White may be seen:
And very much delighteth in the _Pith_ of an _Oxes back_, the tough
outward skin being carefully taken off, without breaking the inward
tender skin. In the Morning early angle for _Chevin_, with a _Snail_;
in the heat of the day, with some other Bait; in the afternoon with the
_Fly_; the great _Moth_, with a great Head, yellow Body, and whiteish
Wings, usually found in _Gardens_, about the Evening: The larger the
_Chevin_, the sooner taken; loving his Bait large, and variety on a
Hook.

The _Char_ is a _Lancashire Fish_, found in a _Mere_, called
_Winander-Mere_ in that _County_, the largest in _England_; and being to
be found no where else, I shall not lead my _London_ Angler thither to
teach him to take it.

The _Chub_, called by some a _Cheven_, by others a _Villain_, is a
_Fish_ of no rare Meat; however, is good for a young Angler, and is thus
to be taken: Bait your hook with a _Grass-hopper_, find the Hole where
he lies, accompanied in a hot day, with twenty or more, floating almost
on the very superficies of the Water; choose which you think best, and
fairest, and drop your Hook some two foot before him, and he will bite
at it greedily, and cannot break hold with his _Leather Mouth_; let him
play and tire, lest you break your Line. If you cannot get a
_Grass-hopper_, then any _Worm_, or _Fly_ you will. In cold Weather,
fish for him near the Bottom, and the _Humble-Bee_ is the best Bait.
Some appropriate Baits according to the Month, but I shall Omit that;
The _Chub_ (being best and in his Prime in the Winter, and then
excellent meat Baked) a Paste made of _Cheese_, and _Turpentine_, is the
only Bait to take him.

The _Carp_ is subtle, and full of Policy, will never bite in Cold
Weather, but in Hot you cannot be too Early, or too Late. In _March_, he
seldome refuseth the _Red-Worme_, in _June_ the _Cadice_, and the three
next _Months_ the _Grass-hopper_: Pastes that are sweet, of which I have
spoken before, are very delightfull to _Carps_: And especially; if you
Bait your ground two or three dayes before you angle, with _Pellets_ of
course Paste, _Chickens-guts_, _Garbage_, &c. _Gentles_ anointed, and a
Piece of _Scarlet_ dipt in _Honey_, put them on the Hook, is an approved
way.

The _Dace_, _Dare_, _Rudd_, and _Roach_, being much of a kind, and
feeding, I shall put together, and are easily taken with small _Worms_,
_Bobs_, _Cadbaits_, _Flies_, _sheeps-Blood_, all sorts of _Worms_, bred
on _Trees_ or _Herbs_, _Paste_, _Wasps_, _Gnats_, _Lipberries_, &c. The
Heads of the _Wasps_, being dipt in Blood, is good for _Dace_, and
_Dare_; as is likewise the _Ant-flie_.

The _Eel_, takes great _Red-worms_, _Beef_, _Wasps_, _Guts_ of _Fowl_,
or _Fish_, _Menow_, small _Roaches_ are good Bait for Night Hooks; the
Hooks being in the Mouth of the _Fish_. Now because this is very
delightfull to most, I shall prescribe three wayes of taking them, as
are most full of Pleasure. The first way is called, _Sniggling_, or
_Broggling_ for _Eels_, thus: Take a strong Line and Hook, baited with a
_Lob_, or _Garden-Worm_, and observing where _Eels_ lurk in the day
time, with a stick forked at the Top, gently put your Bait into the
Hole, and if there be any _Eels_ there, you will not fail of a Bite, of
as large _Eels_ as can be had, but pull not too hard lest you spoyl all.
The second is called _Bobbing_, which is thus done: Take some large well
scowred _Lobs_, and with a Needle, run some strong twisted _Silk_
through them, from end to end, so many as are enough to wrap about a
Board near a dozen times; tye them fast with the two ends of the _Silk_
to hang in so many Hanks; then fasten all to a strong Cord, and a
handfull above the _Worms_ fasten a _Plumb_ of three quarters of a
pound, and your Cord to a strong _Pole_, and in muddy Waters, you may
_Fish_, and find the _Eels_ tug lustily, and when you think they have
swallowed them, draw up your Line, and a-shore with them. _Lastly_, the
_Eel-Spear_ made with four Teeth, jagged on both sides, stricken into
the Mud, on the bottom of a River, and if you chance to strike where
they lye, you infallibly take.

There is likewise an assured way of taking _Eels_, approved to excel any
other, thus done: Take some Bottles of _Hay_, mixt with green _Osiers_,
or _Willows_, Bait them with _Sheeps Guts_, or other _Beasts Garbage_,
sink them down in the middle, to the bottom of your _Pond_, or by the
_Bank-sides_, having fastned a Cord to the Bottles, that you may twitch
them up at your pleasure, and all the best _Eels_ will resort to them,
and you may take abundance.

The _Flounder_, _Shad_, _Thwait_, _Suant_, and _Mullet_, are taken with
_Red-Worms_ of all sorts, _Wasps_, and _Gentles_.

The _Grayling_ is next; In _Angling_ for which, you must head your Hook
upon the shank, with a very slender and narrow plate of _Lead_, that the
Bait (a large _Grass-hopper_) may the more easily come over it; and at
the point put a _Cadbait_, and keep the Bait in continual motion; not
forgetting to pull off the _Grass-hoppers_ Wings.

The _Gudgeon_, takes the smallest _Red-Worm_, _Wasps_, _Gentles_, and
_Cadbaits_. When you _Fish_ for him, stir up the _Sand_ or _Gravel_ with
a _Pole_, which will make them gather thither, and bite more eagerly.

The _Guiniad_, I shall remit speaking to, only mentioning it in course,
being no where found, but in a place called, _Pemble-Mere_, in which
place they abound, as the River _Dee_ does with _Salmon_.

The _Pope_, or _Ruff_, is excellent for a young _Angler_, bites
greedily, and quantities may be taken, by Baiting the Ground with
_Earth_, and your Hook with small Red _Worms_.

The _Pike_, loveth all sorts of Baits (unless the _Fly_) _Gudgeon_,
_Dace_, _Roaches_ and _Loaches_; and young _Frogs_ in _Summer_ time,
of which the yellowest is best.

The _Pearch_, taketh all sorts of _Earth-worms_, especially the
_Lob-worm_, and _Brandling_, well scowred, _Bobs_, _Oak-worms_, _Dors_,
_Gentles_, _Cole-wort-worms_, _Wasps_, _Cadbaits_, and _Menow_, or a
little _Frog_, the Hook being fastned through the skin of his Leg,
towards the upper part of it. Be sure you give the _Pearch_ time enough
to pouch his Bait, before you strike.

The _Salmon_, is taken best with _Lob-worms_, scented with the Oyl of
_Ivy-berries_, or the Oyl of _Polypody_ of the _Oak_ mixt with
_Turpentine_: Or the well-scowred _Garden-worm_, is an excellent Bait:
The _Salmon_ bites best in _May_, _June_, and _July_, at three a _Clock_
in the Afternoon, if the Water be clear, a little Wind stirring,
especially near the _Sea_.

The _Tench_, is a great lover of large Red _Worms_, first dipt in _Tar_.
As also all sorts of Paste, made up with strong scented _Oyls_, or
_Tar_, or a Paste made up of Brown _Bread_, and _Honey_. He will bite
too at a _Cad-worm_, _Lob-worm_, _Flag-worm_, green _Gentle_, _Cadbait_,
_Marsh-worm_, or soft boil’d _Bread-grain_.

The _Torcoth_, being before mentioned, I only let you know, that he is
only found, in the Pool _Linperis_ in _Carnarvan-shire_; and leave you
to the _Welch-mens_ description, both of him and his _Bait_.

The _Trout_, is fattest, and in his prime in _May_, and is caught with
all sorts of _Worms_, especially _Brandlings_, commonly found in an Old
_Dung-hill_, _Cow-dung_, _Hors-dung_, or _Tanners-bark_: Also with
_Flies_, Natural and Artificial, with young _Frogs_, _Menow_, _Marsh_,
_Dock_ or _Flag-worms_; all sorts of _Cad-bait_, _Dors_, _Bobs_,
_Palmers_, _Gentles_, _Wasps_, _Hornets_, &c. and with the
_Catterpiller_, used according to the Rule before prescribed for the
_Grayling_.

_Lastly_, The _Umber_, endeth our _Alphabet_, and _Discourse_ of
_Fishing_ too, and gives me occasion to add no more, but that he is
taken as the _Trout_, just now mentioned; And therefore now to your
Sport: To assist your well effecting which, I have but this to add; Cast
into your Haunts where you use to _Fish_, once in four or five dayes,
soft boyled _Corn_ (or oftner for _Carp_, and _Tench_) Also _Garbage_,
_Beasts Livers_, chopt _Worms_, _Grains_ steept in _Blood_, to attract
them to the place; and to keep them together, throw in half a handfull
of _Grains_ of ground _Malt_: But in a stream, cast it above your Hook,
that floating towards you may draw the Fish thither.

Before I conclude, I was afraid this discourse would have been
imperfect, had not something been spoken of _Fish-ponds_, their
Ordering, and Improving, that the private Gentleman may not be destitute
of some appropriated place to himself, wherein he may Recreate himself
in this excellent Pastime; great _Rivers_ belonging either to the King,
or to Lords of Mannours, whose Authorities and Jurisdictions must be
kept inviolate, and excludes our Intrusion there.


_Of Fish-ponds._

When you have a desire to dig a _Fish-pond_, coveting the several
Advantages that do thence accrue to you, you must first of all consult,
what _Grounds_ are most fit and proper to be cast into a Pond, _viz_,
Those which are _Marrishy_; or _Boggy_; or full of _Springs_, unfit for
_Grazing_, or to be put to any profitable use besides. Of these the
last, full of _springs_, will yield the best Water; that which is
_Marshy_ will feed Fish; and that which is _Boggy_ is best for a Defence
against Thieves.

Thus being furnished with a piece of Wast Ground, I now mentioned, let
us now to work; And first draw by small Trenches all the Springs or
moist Veines into one place, and so drain the rest of the Ground; then
mark out the Head of your Pond, and make it the highest part of the
ground in the Eye, tho it be the lowest in the true Level: Cut the
Trench of your _Floodgate_ so, that when the VVater is let out, it may
have a swift Fall: On each side of which Trench drive in great Stakes of
_Oak_, _Ash_ or (which is best) _Elme_, six foot long, and six Inches
square; place these in Rowes four foot distance one from another, as
broad and wide from the _Floodgate_ as you intend the Head of your Pond
shall go: Now give us the Spade _Tom_, and fetch us the Pick-ax _Jack_,
and to digging of our Pond; Dig it as big and large a Compass as the
Ground will permit, throw your Earth amongst the said stakes, and ram it
between them, hard and firm, till you have covered the stakes: Drive in
as many new ones more besides the heads of the first stakes, and ram
more Earth above them too: Do thus with stakes above stakes till the
head-sides be of a convenient Height: Taking care, that the inside of
your Banks be smooth, even, hard and strong, that you may not fear the
wearing of the Earth off the stakes by any Current of the Water.

Having thus digged about _eight foot deep_, that so it may carry about
_six foot_ VVater, pave all the _bottom_ and the Banks of the Pond with
large Sods of _Flot-Grass_, laying them very close together, pin them
down fast with small stakes and windings: This Grass is a great Feeder
of Fish, and grows naturally under VVater. Stake down to the bottom of
one side of the Pond divers Bavens and Brush-VVood-Faggots, into which
the Fish may cast their spawn, and preserve it: In another place lay
Sods upon Sods, the grass sides together to nourish and breed _Eels_.

The Pond being thus made, let in the Water, and now observe to store it
thus: Put your _Carp_, _Breame_ and _Tench_ by themselves: _Pike_,
_Pearch_, _Eel_ and _Tench_ (the Fishes Physician) by themselves; & for
Food of the greater Fishes, as well as Meat for your greater Dishes, put
good store of _Roach_, _Dace_, _Loach_ and _Menow_; and Lastly to every
one _Melter_ put three _Spawners_, and in three Years the Increase will
be great; and in five Years with difficulty destroyed.

At the end of three Years _Sue your Pond_; which you must ever continue
so to do, for that the _Roach_, &c. will increase in such abundance,
that eating up the sweetest food, will make your other Fish, as _Carps_,
&c. be lean and hunger-starved: And therefore every Year view your Pond,
and observe if any such Fry appears; and use your Discretion.

And because the _Carp_ is a Fish of a general Acceptation, and is of a
_bon goust_ almost in every mans palate; and being by the aforesaid
little Devourers and Multiplyers, very often Deceived in your
expectation of a fat _Carp_, large and sweet; I shall insert here an
excellent VVay of making _Carps_ grow to an extraordinary Bigness in a
Pond.


_To make _Carps_ grow large, &c._

About the Month of _April_, when you perceive your Pond grow low in
VVater, rake all the sides where the VVater is fallen away with an Iron
Rake, and sow _Hay-seeds_ there, and rake it well; and at the Latter end
of Summer you shall have good store of Grass: The _Winter_ being come
the VVater will encrease and over-top all the Grass, and there being
VVater enough to carry them, the _Carps_ will resort to the seeds, and
feed briskly and grow as fat as _Hoggs_: Thus do every _Summer_, till
you sue your pond, and no River _Carp_ can surpass them.

Thus much of _Fishing_ and _Fish-Ponds_.




Of Shooting.


The Use of the Bow is of so great Antiquity, and of so important a
Consequence for a _defensive_ and _offensive Armes_, that I could not
but a little consider, how needful the true knowledge of its Use was
esteemed of Old, and how _little it is accounted_ now. It is uncertain,
as well as (almost) unknown, who was the First Inventor of the Bow; but
if we examine the _Probability_ there may be of its being derived from
the Tyranical Government of _Nimrod_, that so _Mighty Hunter before the
Lord_, we may _Conjecture_ him to be the first Inventor of the Bow: For
as he is called the _First Founder_ of a _Monarchick Government_, by
reducing and subduing a disordered People under the Government of
himself; so was he likewise esteemed a _Mighty Hunter_ in another
respect, for that he _Subdued likewise the Beasts of the Field_; as is
observed of him and his Character, by sundry Commentators on him and his
Family. So that in the whole we may suppose him to be the Inventor, or
first Finder out of the Bow, as a Weapon of an infallible Execution and
mortal Efficacy on that account. Nor can I find any mention made of the
_Bow_ thro the whole Hystory of _Genesis_ from _Nimrod_ to _Esau_, they
both being characterized with those Epithets of _Mighty and Cunning
Hunters_, _Men of the Field_; who very well understood the Use of the
Bow, as well for their _Profit_ as _Pleasure_; the last of which is
particularly hinted in the commands of _Isaac_ to _Esau_, that with his
_Quiver_ and his _Bow_, he should Hunt and take that only _Seasonable_
Dish, which might procure and entaile a _Blessing_ on him and his
Posterity. Nay, that Holy Patriarch _Jacob_ himself, in his last Will
and Testament to his Illustrious Family, bequeaths a _singular Portion_
to his beloved _Joseph_, which the _strength of his Bow_ had intitled
him to. _Gen._ 48. 22.

Nor are we to doubt in what Estimation it was held to the Reign of
_David_ King of _Israel_, who thought it the most _Necessary
Qualification_ of his Subjects, to be very well versed in the Use of the
_Bow_. The _Bow_ which was the Famous _Signal_ between his beloved
_Jonathan_ and himself, and made the private _Testimonial_ of the
undeserv’d Fury of his Maliciously & Enviously incensed _Father Saul_:
By reason of whose eminent Skill, in the expert use of it, he chants
forth his _Mournful Elegy_, The _Bow of _Jonathan_ returned not empty,
from the Blood of the slain_, &c. Nay further so useful (no doubt) he
thought the Knowledge of the Bow was, and of so necessary a Consequence
for a Defensive as well as Offensive Armes, that it is observable he
issued out a particular Edict or Proclamation, commanding the _general
Learning its use throughout_ Judah. And the Use of it continued and
still does in the East, as the only Weapon they are skilled in.

Dr. _Heylin_ in his Cosmographical Description of the World, tells us,
That the _Czeremissi_, a People living in great Forrests, without
Houses, feeding on Honey & the Flesh of Wild Beasts & Clothed with their
Skins, under the Empire of the _Czar_ of _Russia_, are such excellent
Archers, and so light of Foot, that they carry their Bows continually in
their hands, and practise their Children so timely in it, that (after
such an age) till they can hit a _White_ that is set before them, they
give them nothing to eat.

Further; it is recorded of the _Parthians_ (and indeed all the
_Persians_ too) that their greatest Fame consisted in their skilful
handling their _Bows_ and _Arrows_, & were deservedly reckon’d the best
Archers in the World, having the Art of _Shooting backwards_, and making
their _Retreat_ and _Flight_ more pernicious and terrible, than their
_Charge_ and _Onset_. So that when _Marcus Crassus_ in his expedition
against them, was told by an _Astrologer_, that having found an ill
Aspect in _Scorpio_, he presaged his Enterprize would prove
unsuccesseful, _Tush Man_ (quoth he) _I fear not Scorpio, but
Sagittarius_.

And to descend to our own Countrymen the English, the frequent Victories
they obtained over the _French_ formerly, rendred them as famous and
able Bow-men (next the _Parthians_) as were in the World.

But since the Ingenious _Franciscan_ Fryer (_Bertholdus Swart_) appeared
in _Germany_, his _Sulphureous_ Brain has quite (or almost) _blown_ up
the Reputation of the Bow, and all other Ancient Devices and Engines of
War, by his _Accidental Invention_ of that Fatal Instrument the _Gun_,
which he first communicated to the _Venetians_, _Anno 1330_. Who gave by
these (then so called) _Bombards_, a notable discomfiture to the
_Genoys_; and was next made use of by the Inhabitants of the _Baltick
Sea_; And at the Siege of _Callice_ _Anno 1347._ used by the _English_;
who taught it the _Mounsieur Frenchman_, and he gratified him with the
death of the Famous Leader, _Thomas Mountacute_ Earl of _Salisbury_,
shot at the Siege of _Orleance_, _Anno. 1425_. After which _Spain_
learnt it, and the _Jews_ and _Moors_ from thence taught the _Turk_; and
from the first Invention of _large_ and _unweildy_, they were made fit
for _Walls_ and _Hands_; and in fine _is a less expensive way of
shedding blood than that of Archery is_.

Thus you see how Ancient the Use of the _Bow_ is, and how lately its
Disuse began (I mean in relation to the Common-Wealth, as a defensive,
or offensive Weapon) and how great the Ancient Fame of our _English_ was
in the knowledge of it: However the Glory of it is somewhat still
preserved (though in a Pastime) by the Honourable City of _London_,
whose _Lord Mayor_ annually appears to see a _Prize_ performed by
_Shooting_ with a Pound _Arrow_: And therefore all I have to say more,
is, That it is deservedly placed amongst my Recreations, having
_Metamorphosed_ its Use, and become a Healthful Conserver, instead of
Destroyer of mens Bodies. And is vulgarly distinguished into two sorts,
the _Long-bow_, and the _Cross_ or _Crow-Bow_.

I shall begin first with the _Long-bow_, whose Use is (now) thus to be
understood. That it conduces much to the Health of our Body, disperses
our stagnated Blood, extends our contracted Limbs, and renders the
Members of our Bodies plyant, and flexible; and for the better obtaining
these Effects, the following Rules are to be Observed.

Before the _Archer_ goes to his Sport (to follow the Method of this
Treatise) he must first provide himself with necessary _Accoutrements_,
_viz_, The _Bow_ which claimes his first Care, must be the best (_as
best is best Cheap_) of _Spanish_ or _English Yew_, (the _VVithen_, or
_Elme_ being the worst:) Next his _Shaft_, which must be of _Birch_,
_Sugar-Chest_, or _Brazeel_, with _Gray_, or _White Feathers_.

Thus equipt, to the Field, and here we are to understand three sorts of
_Marks_, _viz_, The _But_, which is a _Mark_ that is level, and requires
a strong _Arrow_ with a broad Feather: The _Prick_, a _Mark_ of some
compass, of a certain distance, requires an _Arrow_ that is strong, and
nimble, with a middle Feather: The _Rover_, is an uncertain _Mark_, and
Proportionable to the distance, suit your _Arrows_. But before you
Shoot, hold a little, and hearken to your Charge.

_First_, The _Archer_ must have a good _Eye_, to see and discern his
_Mark_; attended with a _Knowing Judgment_, to Understand the distance
of Ground, and in what compass his _Arrow_ must Fly, and to take the
true Advantage of a Side-Wind; and a Dexterity to give his _Shaft_ a
sharp strong and sudden Loose, and without hanging on the string, to
draw his _Arrow_ close to the Head, and in an instant deliver it.

_Secondly_, He must observe a _Decorum_ in his standing Posture, that
his Body be fair, comely, and upright; his left Foot a convenient stride
before his right, with both his Hams stiff, his left Arm holding his
_Bow_ in the midst, stretch’d out streight; and with his three
Fore-Fingers and Thumb of his right-hand, draw the string to his right
Ear, the Notch of his _Arrow_ resting between his fore and long Fingers
of his Right-Hand, and the _Steel_ of his _Arrow_ below the _Feathers_
upon the middle _Knuckle_ of his fore-finger, on his Left-Hand, drawing
it up close, as abovesaid.

The _Cross-Bow_ (as I said in the Introduction to this _Treatise_) is of
equal Benefit and Pleasure with the _Long-Bow_, when through an
imbecillity in the _Arm_ or _Back_, that will not be a suitable
Recreation: This _Bow_ must be made of the same Wood with the other, for
_Gafel_ carried upon a string, and the other end being placed in a Rest,
furnish your self with strong and heavy _Arrows_, suitable to your
_Bows_ strength, and all the foregoing _Marks_, may afford you an equal
Delight with the Former; but especially for Persons that have the
unhappiness of looking asquint, it is an excellent Disposer of the
sight, to a direct Line, and helps that _Watermans_ quality of _Looking
one way, and Rowing another_. Thus much shall suffice for _Shooting_.




Of Bowling,


This is a Recreation of an Ancient Institution, the _Lydians_ being
thought to have been the first Inventors of _Sphæromachia_, which
signifies _Bowling_, as well as _Tennis-Playing_; besides these they
instituted several other Games, as the _Dice_, _Tables_, _Cards_, &c.
Necessity, and Hunger enforcing them to that Ingenuity, as _Persius_
well observes, _Artis Magister, Ingenijque largitor Venter_: For that
Country being Oppressed with a great Dearth and Famine, in the time of
_Atis_, one of the Progenitors of _Omphale_, they Devised these Games,
that every second day playing at them, they might beguile their Hungry
Bellies, and drive away the Tediousness of the Famine. And indeed,
according to its Original institution, of infinite use for the diverting
Melancholly, for Exercise of the Body, by runing and stirring in this
Game, for helping likewise sundry Bodily Infirmities, as the _Stone_,
_Gravel_, _Reins_, &c. For which aforesaid ends several Pious, Learned
and Sober Persons have sometimes made up the Company of a
_Bowling-Green_ (tho I must confess rarely to be seen in those common
_Bowling-Allies_ and _Bares_, which too usually are pestered with
_Damming-Rooks_, _Cunning Betters_, _Crafty Matchers_, and base
_Booty-Players_:) Herein we may see the World moralized, or
emblematically described, where most are short, over, wide or
wrong-Byassed, and few justle in to the Mistress _Fortune_: On one side
we find _Heraclitus_ and his Followers fret, vex, rail, swear and cavil
at every thing; on the other side _Democritus_, and his Company rejoice
and laugh, as if they were created for that purpose. On one side you may
see the _Mimick_ screwing and twisting his Body into several Postures,
which he perswades himself adds either to the Swiftness or Slowness of
his Bowl; On the other side the senseless _Orator_, with his perswasive
Intreaties of _Rub, O Rub a little_; Or, _Flee, Flee_, and the like, to
hasten or retard the Speed of his Bowl; when if the stupid Bowl lend a
deaf Ear to his Perswasions, then he _belyes_ his Disobedience, by
crying _Short, Short, O Short_, when tis gone ten yards over; and when
tis bowled short of the _Jack_ six yards, he cryes, _Gone a Mile,
a Mile, a Mile_, &c. But not to detain you any longer in characterizing
this excellent sport: (_Excellent_ I mean if rightly used) I shall
before I lead you into the _Green_ or _Bare_, instruct you in some
Rules, how to choose your _Bowls_.

The first and greatest Cunning to be observed in _Bowling_, is the right
_chusing your Bowl_, which must be suitable to the Grounds you design to
run on, thus: For _close Alleys_, your best Choice is the _Flat Bowl_:
2. For _open Grounds_ of Advantage, the _Round-Byassed-Bowl_; 3. For
_Green Swarths_, that are plain and level, the Bowl that is _Round as a
Ball_.

The next thing requires your Care is, _The chusing out your Ground_, and
preventing the Windings, Hangings, and many turning _Advantages_ of the
same, whether it be in open wide places, as _Bares_ and
_Bowling-Greens_, or in close _Bowling-Alleys_.

Lastly, Have your _Judgment_ about you to observe and distinguish the
_Risings_, _Fallings_ and _Advantages_ of the Places where you Bowl:
Have your _Wits_ about you to avoid being rookt of your Money: And have
your Understanding about you, to know your best Time and Opportunity for
this Recreation; and finally a studious Care of your Words and Passions,
and then _Bowl_ away, and you may deserve, _Well have you Bowled
indeed_.

But methinks I cannot conclude here, without admiring how aptly a
Bowling-Green is by the Divine _Quarles_ characterized, in the following
Verses, thus.

  _Brave pastime, _Readers_, to consume that Day,
  Which without Pastime flies too swift away!
  See how they Labour, as if Day and Night
  Were both too short to serve their loose Delight?
  See how their curved _Bodies_ wreath, and skrue
  Such Antick shapes as _Proteus_ never knew:
  One rapps an Oath, another deals a Curse,
  He never better bowl’d, this never worse;
  One rubs his itchless Elbow, shruggs and laughs,
  The t’other bends his beetle-brows, and chafes;
  Sometimes they whoop, sometimes the _Stygian_ Cryes,
  Send their black _Santo’s_ to the blushing Skies:
  Thus mingling Humours in a mad Confusion
  They make bad Premisses and worse Conclusion._

Thus much for _Bowling_.




Of Tennis.


This Recreation is of the same Date for its _Antiquity_ of Invention
with _Bowling_, and for the _Violence_ of its Exercise to be preferred
before it. This sport indeed is of so universal an Acceptance, that
Majesty it self is pleased to design it its Recommendation, by tracking
its laborious steps; and _Princes_ and _Lords_ admire it too for the
most proper Recreation, to suit with _Innocence_, and _true Nobility_.
Here the body is briskly exercised more than ordinary, and inured in
_Agility_ and _Nimbleness_; this renders the Limbs flexible and
mettlesom, and adapts them for the most Vigorous Enterprize: It makes
the languid and slothful, _brisk_ and _sprightful_; and rejects
_Effeminacy_ and _Delicacy_, as contemptible and unworthy so Royal and
Noble a Recreation: And so General indeed is the Estimation this
Exercise of _Tennis_ amongst most meets with, that it is reckoned one of
the most absolute Qualifications of a well-bred Gentleman, throughly to
understand this famous Game.

But why should we wonder at the general Love Gentlemen have for this
Recreation, since it must be acknowledged, it challengeth as deserving a
place in the Catalogue of violent Exercises, as any that goes before it
in this Treatise; indeed it may be well rankt among those great
Excellencies of Exercise which rendered the _Lacedemonians_, Famous to
all Posterity for instructing their young Gentlemen and Noblemen in: Nay
for ought I know it is a _derivative Vertue_ which descended to the true
_English_ Gentleman, from that so excellent Method of Education used
amongst the Warlike Nation the _Gothes_: Who (as _Olaus Magnus_ informes
us) amongst the greatest Severities, as _Beatings_ and _Wounds_, _Change
of Heat into sudden Cold_, _lying_ (not on _Downe_ but) upon _Boards_,
_coursely clad_, and _Feeding_ on _Ordinary_, but strong _Food_, used
themselves to the most tedious, wearisome and Violent Exercises, as
_Riding_, _Darting_, _Shooting_, &c. _Wearing heavy Armes_, _Swimming on
Horse-Back and in Armour_; And had they been acquainted with this
Exercise of _Tennis_, would not have omitted that neither: But I shall
not enlarge any further on its _Encomium_, its being the Pastime of the
most knowing and greatest men, shall stop any longer _Eulogies_ my Pen
can make on its Worth and Excellence. All I have to say is, I am
heartily sorry, there are no _Rules_ which fall within the Sphere of
_Demonstration_, to be laid down for my Readers use, for the right
prosecuting this Noble Game: Practice and Experience alone must be his
Information and Direction, and not any Writing may be communicated to
him: Only let me say this.

_Tennis_ and _Baloon_ are Sports which are play’d almost with the same
Instruments; and therefore may be under one and the same Head: The first
is a pastime, used in close or open Courts, by striking a little _Round
Ball_ to and fro, either with the _Palmes_ of the hands (and then is
called _Pila palmaria_ in Latin) or else a _Racket_, made for the
purpose, round with Net or Cat-gut, with a Handle: The other a strong
and moving Sport in the Open Fields with a great Ball of a double
Leather filled with Wind, and so driven to and fro with the strength of
a Mans Arm, armed in a Brace of Wood: And thus much shall suffice to
speak of the _Baloon_ and _Tennis_; only let me desire you, let not this
or any other Pastime disturb your Minds; divert you from the diligent
and careful Prosecution of your own lawful Business; or invite you to
throw away your Time and Money too lavishly and idley; nor engage you in
any Passion; that so you may not offend God, dislike your _Neighbour_,
nor incomode your _Self_ and _Family_ in your Well-being and Felicity;
and then you may recreate your self without Fear, and in this Recreation
observe the ensuing Morality of


The Tennis-Court.

  _When as the Hand _at Tennis_ Playes,
      And Men to Gaming fall,
  _Love_ is the _Court_, _Hope_ is the _House_,
      And _Favour_ serves the _Ball_._

  _This _Ball_ it self is _due Desert_,
      The _Line_ that measure showes
  Is _Reason_, whereon _Judgment_ looks
      Where Players win and lose._

  _The _Tutties_ are _Deceitful Shifts_,
      The _Stoppers_, _Jealousy_,
  Which hath Sir _Argus_ hundred Eyes,
      Wherewith to watch and pry._

  _The _Fault_ whereon _Fifteen is lost_,
      Is _Want of Wit and Sense_,
  And he that brings the _Racket_ in
      Is _Double Diligence_._

  _But now the _Racket_ is _Free-Will_,
      Which makes the _Ball_ rebound,
  And noble _Beauty_ is the _Choice_,
      And of each Game the _Ground_._

  _Then _Racket_ strikes the _Ball_ away,
      And there is _Over-sight_,
  A _Bandy_ ho! the People cry,
      And so the _Ball_ takes flight._

  _Now at the length _Good-liking_ proves
      _Content_ to be their _Gain_:
  Thus in the _Tennis-Court_, _Love is
      A Pleasure mixt with Pain_._




Of Ringing.


Since this Recreation of _Ringing_ is become so highly esteemed, for its
excellent _Harmony of Musick_ it affords the _Ear_, for its
_Mathematical Invention_ delighting the _Mind_, and for the _Violence of
its Exercise_ bringing Health to the _Body_, causing it to transpire
plentifully, and by Sweats dissipate and expel those Fuliginous thick
_Vapours_, which _Idleness_, _Effeminacy_ and _Delicacy_ subject men to;
I say for these and sundry other Reasons, I was induced to bring this of
_Ringing_ into the Company of _Exercises_ in this Treatise, that I might
as well recreate you with some health-conducing Pleasure at _home_, as I
have carryed you _abroad_, and there endeavoured to please you in what
Pastime your Inclinations may most peculiarly select.

Whosoever would then become an accurate Master of this excellent Art and
Pleasure, and is very desirous to be esteemed an Elaborate and Ingenious
_Ringer_, and be enrolled amongst that Honoured _Society_ of +Colledge
Youths+; I must beg Leave to instruct him before he enters the
_Bell-free_, in these ensuing short Rules, which he must strictly
observe. _viz._

1. That as all _Musick_ consists in these six plain _Notes_, _La Sol Fa
Mi Re Ut_; so in _Ringing_, a Peal of Bells is Tuned according to these
Principles of Musick: For as each _Bell takes its Denomination from the
Note it Sounds_, by its being flatter or deeper, as, _First_, or Treble,
_Second_, _Third_, _Fourth_, &c. as they are in number to _Ten_ or
_Twelve_ Bells, the Last being called the _Tennor_; So must they
successively strike one after another both _Fore-stroke_ and
_Back-stroke_, in a due Musical Time or Equidistance, to render their
Harmony the more pleasant, and to make the Young Practitioner the better
informed to observe the _Life of Musick_, and indeed of true Ringing,
_Time_; and therefore is called, _Round-Ringing_.

2. As in Musick, so in Ringing there are _three Concords_, so called
from their Melodious Harmony and Agreement, which Principally are these;
_Thirds_, _viz._ 1 3, 2 4. _&c._ _Fifths_ 1 5, 2 6 _&c._ _Eights_ 1 8,
2 9, 3 10 &c. and these are the more pleasant according to the Number of
Bells they are struck on, and as they are struck, whether seperately or
mutually. From hence _Changes_ are made, which is only a Changing place
of one _Note_ with another, so variously, as Musick may be heard a
thousand wayes of Harmony; which being so obvious to common Observation,
I shall not go about to demonstrate; for that if two may be varied two
wayes, surely by the _Rule of Multiplication_, a Man may easily learn
how many times 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, or 12 Bells Notes may be varied, which
will run almost _ad infinitum_.

3. For the better observing the Ringing of _Changes_ or _Rounds_, these
three things are to be noted.

1. _The Raising true in Peal._

2. _Ringing at a low Compass_; And

3. _Ceasing in true Peal_; All which three are the most essential Parts
to render a Practitioner _Excellent_.

1. For _Raising a Peal of Bells true_, the modern & best Practice
recommends the _swiftest and quickest possible_, every one taking
Assistance to raise his Bell, as its going requires: The _lesser_ Bells
as _Treble_, _&c._ being by main strength _held down_ in their first
Sway (or pull) to get time for the striking of the rest of Larger
Compass; and so continued to be strong pulled till Frame-high, and then
may be slackned: The _Bigger_, as _Tenor_, &c. must be _pincht_ or
checkt over head, that the Notes may be heard to strike roundly and
hansomely. Observe that all the Notes strike round at one Pull: I do not
mean the First; but ’tis according to the Bigness and Weightiness of
your Bells: However in raising a Peal, do not let one _Bell_ strike
before the rest, or miss when the rest do; this is contrary to the
Strict Rules of _true Ringing_: And this is called _Round-Ringing_. Now
if you design to raise a Peal of Bells for _Changes_, you ought to raise
them to a Set-Pull, as the most proper for commanding the Notes, and he
who is not well skilled to manage his Bell at a _Set-Pull_, will be apt
to drop or overturn it, be in a Wood, and fruitlessly toil and moil
himself. Therefore in practising the Setting of a Bell, cast your Eye
about the other Bell-Ropes, during your managing your own, that you may
accustome your selfe to manage it according to the _Change_.

2. For _Ringing at a Low Compass_, is thus observed: By keeping a due
_punctum_ or beat of Time, in the successive striking one after another
of every Bell; the _best Ringer_ being set to the _Treble_, that may
guide and direct the rest of the Notes in their due _Measure_.

3. For _Ceasing a Peal of Bells_; Let them fall gradually from a set
_Peal_, checking them only at Sally, till the low Compass renders it
useless; and when so low, that for want of Compass, they can scarce
strike at Back-stroak; then let the _Treble_-Ringer stamp, as a Signal,
to notify, that the next time they come to strike at the Fore-stroke,
to check them down, to hinder their striking the Back-stroke; yet
Fore-stroke continued, till brought to a neat and gracefull Chime, which
may be the _Finis_ to that _Peal_.

Thus much in short, for _Raising_, _Round-Ringing_, and _Ceasing_ a
_Peal_ of _Bells_; I come next to lead you forth into that spacious
_Field_ of Variety of _Changes_, and present you with Instructions that
may be meerly necessary, for the right Understanding the several kinds
of them.

Now in _Ringing Changes_, two of our best Senses, are to be employed,
_viz._ The _Ear_, and the _Eye_: The _Ear_, Hearing when to make a
_Change_; and the _Eye_ directing the _Bell_ in making it: The _Bells_
being the Object of the Former, and the _Bell-Ropes_ the Object of the
Latter. And to render both the Eye and Ear Usefull in Ringing _Changes_,
these _Five_ things are throughly to be Understood

_First._ Endeavour to distinguish the _Notes_ of a _Peal_ of _Bells_,
one from another while Ringing.

_Secondly_, Learn to apprehend the Places of the _Notes_.

_Thirdly_, Understand the Precendency of _Notes_.

_Fourthly_, How to make a _Change_ in _Ringing_.

_Fifthly_, and _Lastly_. How to Practise the four fore-going Notions in
General.

1. _To know the Notes of a Peal of Bells asunder_ (which is easy in
_Round-Ringing_) in _Changes_ is thus: Get the skill of Tuning them with
your _Voice_, by imitating their Notes while _Ringing_. Or if you are
acquainted, either by your self or Friend, with some _Singing-master_,
or one who has skill in _Singing_, get him to instruct you in the true
Pitch of any _Note_, and aid your distinguishing them; otherwise you may
be puzzled in this, to know which is _Treble_, which _Second_, &c. as in
532641, _&c._

2. To know the Places of the _Notes_, is no way better to be apprehended
than thus: The Practitioner ought to form an _Idea_ in his Head of the
Place of each _Note_, whether in a direct _Line_, or _Obliquely_; and
representing them by a _Figure_ in his mind, see (as it were) by the Eye
of his Understanding each stroke of the _Bell_, as the _Treble_, 1.
_Second_ 2. _Third_ 3. _&c._ so that as the _Ear_ is to direct him, when
to make the Change, so a right Apprehension of the _Motion_ and _Places_
of the _Notes_, ought to be a means to guide his Ear.

3. The Precedency of _Notes_, is of a very Obvious Demonstration; thus:
In Ringing _Changes_, the Fore and Back-stroke, successively following
one another, are properly said to _Lye behind_ one another, according to
their places of striking. Or in short, in 12345. the _Note_ that leads
either at Fore or Back-stroak, is said to _Lye before_ the rest, and the
last to be behind. As the 2 is said to lye behind the 1, so it lyeth
before the 3, as the 3 lyeth behind the 2, so it lyeth before the 4. And
so of as many as are _Rung_.

4. The manner of making a _Change_, is very common, and needs no
particular, but general Rule; That it is made by moving one _Note_ into
anothers place, Up and Down, as Occasion requires; but all usually made
by two _Notes_ standing one next the other, as hereafter may be
Observed.

_Lastly_, In your Ringing _Changes_, these two things (in which consists
the practick part of this Art) are to be rightly considered. _First_,
Readily to know which two _Bells_ are to make the succeeding _Change_.
And _Secondly_, to consider (if you are concern’d in it) what _Bell_ you
are to follow in making it. To understand which the more perfectly, you
must imprint in your memory, the Method of the _Changes_ prick’d in
_Figures_, and to be expert likewise in setting them down divers wayes,
and making any _Figure_ a _Hunt_ at Pleasure; and thus without pausing
or hesitating to consider the Course, you may throughly understand the
Methods; the Four preceding Observations being first perfectly
understood.

There are two wayes of _Ringing Changes_, viz. By _Walking_ them, as the
Artists stile it; or by _Whole-pulls_, or _Half-pulls_: _Walking_ is,
when in one _Change_ the _Bells_ go round, _Four_, _Six_, or _Eight_
times; which is a most incomparable way to improve a young Practitioner,
by giving him time to consider, which two _Bells_ do make the next
succeeding _Change_, and in making it, what _Bell_ each is to follow;
so that by this means (by his industry) he may be capable of Ringing at
_Whole-Pulls_; Which is, when the _Bells_ go round in a Change at fore
and back-stroke; and a new Change is made every time they are pulled
down at Sally: This an Ancient Practice, but is now laid aside, since we
have learnt a more advantageous way of hanging our _Bells_, that we can
manage a _Bell_ with more ease at a Set-Pull than formerly: So that
Ringing at _Half-Pulls_ is now the modern general Practice; that is,
When one Change is made at Fore-Stroke, another at Back-Stroke, _&c._

I have one Thing more to add in these _introductory_ Rules, and that in
short is this: He that Rings the slowest _Hunt_, ought to notify the
_extreme Changes_; which is, when the Leading _Bell_ is pulling down,
that he might make the Change next before the Extreme, he ought to say,
_Extreme_. By this means, betwixt the Warning and the Extreme there will
be one compleat Change.


_Of Changes_, &c.

There are _two kinds of Changes_, viz. _Plain Changes_, and
_Cross-Peals_; which Terms do denote the _Nature_ of them; for as the
first is stiled _Plain_, so are its Methods easy; and as the second is
called _Cross_, so are its Methods cross and intricate: The First have a
general Method, in which all the Notes (except Three) have a direct
_Hunting-Course_, moving gradually under each other, plainly and
uniformly: _Plain_ are likewise termed _single Changes_, because there
is but one single Change made in the striking all the Notes round,
either at fore or back-stroke. But the Second is _various_, each Peal
differing in its Course from all others; and _in Cross-Peals as many
Changes may be made as the Notes will permit_. In short, as to
_Plain-Changes_, I shall not dilate on them here, it being so _plainly_
understood by every one that lately have rung a _Bell_ in peal; All
therefore I shall add is this, That any two Notes that strike next
together may make a Change, which may be done either _single_ or
_double_, as you list. The _single_, by changing Two Notes; and the
_Double_, by changing Four, _i. e._ Two to make one Change, and two
another; which is however called _One double Change_, and not two
Changes; because tis made in striking the Notes of the _Bells_ once
round. For the rest, common Observation and Practice bids me stop here,
and demands a Clearing those dark Intricacies which attend
_Cross-Peals_.


_Of Cross-Peals._

_Art_, being a curious Searcher and Enquirer into the hidden and
abstruse _Arcana_’s of Difficulties, having found out that dark and
remote Corner of Obscurity, wherein the nature of these _Cross-Peals_
lay at first invelopped, has exhibited by its _Proselytes_ the ensuing
Demonstrations of that which before lay mantled up in Doubt: And to
effect this, these _Favourites of Art_ have, like ingenious Architects,
made Order and Method the _Basis_, on which the whole Structure depends:
For in these _Cross-Peals_ we must observe the _prime Movement_, which
sets the whole Frame a going, and that is called the _Hunt_, which hath
_One constant Uniform Motion throughout the Peal_, and different from
that of the other Notes; and indeed by this the whole Course of the Peal
is Steered. This keeps a continual motion through the other Notes,
_i. e._ From Leading, to strike behind, and from thence again to Lead;
which is called one _compleat Course_.

Some Peals upon _five Bells_ consist of _single_ Courses, wherein are
ten Changes, and twelve Courses make the Peal. Others upon Five, consist
of Double Courses, wherein are twenty Changes to every Course, and six
Courses in the Peal.

Upon _six Bells_ there are likewise _single_ and _double_ Courses,
_viz._ Twelve Changes in every single Course, as in _Grandsire Bob_, &c.
and Twenty-four Changes in every Double Course, as in _Colledge Bobs_,
that being the first Change of every Course, wherein the _Hunt_ leaves
Leading: In short, judiciously observe the first Course of any
_Cross-Peal_, and you will soon see the general Method of the whole
Peal: All Courses in Cross-Peals agreeing in these following three
Respects. First, _In the motion of the Hunt_. Secondly, _In the motion
of the rest of the Notes_: And Thirdly, _In making the Changes_. Which
three things being well (to omit Instances of Demonstration) and
narrowly observed, will be very helpful both in pricking and ringing
Courses; the first and third for directing you in Pricking them, and the
first and second in Ringing them.

There is one _Difficulty_ to be removed e’re I can come to prick down
those _Peals_ I design to be the Subject of the Discourse of this
_Epitome_, and that is, _How to make the first Changes at the beginning
of each Peal_; I mean to make the _Second_, _Third_, _Fourth_, &c.
_whole Hunts_; and this in short is thus directed: In any _Cross-Peal_
the _Whole Hunt_ may move either up or down at the beginning; and the
Motion of the _Whole Hunt_, in the first Course of each of the following
Peals, will direct the first Motion of any _Cross-hunt_, and by
Consequence of making the first Changes in that Peal. Taking along with
you this Observation.

That whensoever the first Change of any Peal happens to be _single_, it
must be made at the back-stroke, to prevent _cutting Compass_; and the
like when a double Change happens first in a Peal of _Triples and
doubles_: But when it happens, that the first Change is made at the
Back-stroke, then Consequently the Bells at the end of the Peal will
come round at a Fore-stroke Change.

I shall omit speaking to any of the several _Peals_ on _four or five
Bells_; for that in my Opinion little _Musick_ is heard, though much
_practical Observation_ is made, from them; and therefore shall begin
with _Grandsire-Bob_, as having mentioned it but just before in my
general View I made of _Cross-Peals_.


  _Grandsire Bob._

_Bob_ Changes take their Name from this, _viz._ When the _Treble_ leads
in the _Second_ and _Third_, and the _Fifth_ and _Sixth_’s places, then
they are called _Bob-Changes_. In Ringing which you are to observe these
Rules, _viz._

Whatsoever Bells you follow when you _Hunt up_, the same Bells in the
same order you must follow in _Hunting down_; as in the Changes here
prickt, where the _Treble_ hunting up _First_ follow _Second_, then
_Fourth_, and then _Sixth_; when it comes behind, _First_ follows
_Second_, in hunting down _Fourth_; and when hunted up follows _Sixth_
in the same Order: The like may be observed in Ringing any other Bell,
with this Difference betwixt the Whole-hunt and the rest, _viz._ Every
time the Whole-hunt leaves the _Treble_’s place, and hunts up, it
followeth different Bells from what it did at its first hunting up.

In the ensuing Peal here prickt are _Eighteen-score_ Changes, wanting
one. It may be Rung with any _Hunts_, and begin the Changes _Triple_ and
_Double_: You may make your Extreme at the first, second, or third
_single Bob_; or the first, second, or third time, that the half and
_quarter-hunts_ dodg behind; the _single_ must be made behind in either
of these.

  123456
  ------
  214365
  241635
  426153
  462513
  645231
  654321
  563412
  536142
  351624
  315264
  132546
  135264
  312546
  321456
  234165
  243615
  426351
  462531
  645213
  654123
  561432
  516342
  153624
  156342
  513624
  531264
  352146
  325416
  234561
  243651
  426315
  462135
  641253
  614523
  165432
  _bob._
  156423
  514632
  541362
  453126
  435216
  342561
  324651
  236415
  263145
  621354
  612534
  165243
  162534
  615243
  651423
  564132
  546312
  453621
  435261
  342516
  324156
  231465
  213645
  126354
  123645
  216354
  261534
  625143
  652413
  564231
  546321
  453612
  435162
  341526
  314256
  132465
  134256
  312465
  321645
  236154
  263514
  625341
  652431
  564213
  546123
  451632
  415362
  143526
  _bob._
  134562
  315426
  351246
  532164
  523614
  256341
  265431
  624513
  642153
  461235
  416325
  143652
  _bob._
  134625
  316452
  361542
  635124
  653214
  562341
  526431
  254613
  245163
  421536
  412356
  143265
  142356
  ------
  124536
  125463
  ------
  152643
  156234
  ------
  165324
  163542
  ------
  136452
  _bob._
  163425
  ------
  136245
  132654
  ------
  123564
  125346
  ------
  152436
  154263
  ------
  145623
  _bob._
  154632
  ------
  145362
  _bob._
  154326
  ------
  145236
  142563
  ------
  124653
  126435
  ------
  162345
  163254
  ------
  136524
  135642
  ------
  153462
  _bob._
  135426
  ------
  153246
  152364
  ------
  125634
  126543
  ------
  162453
  164235
  ------
  146325
  _bob._
  164352
  ------
  146532
  _bob._
  164523
  ------
  146253
  142635
  ------
  124365
  ------
  123456
  ------

Thus much for the _Grandsire-Bob_; I shall next collect what _London
Peals_ I think most Harmonious, and agreeable, without troubling my self
to go to _Oxford_, or _Nottingham_, or _Redding_, to enquire after their
different Methods of _Peales_, as indeed needless; and my reason is
this: Because I think the same Rules for _Peales_ that are suitable to
our _London Genius_, may challenge likewise an Acceptance amongst other
_Cities_; provided their _Steeples_ are furnished with as many, and as
good _Bells_, and their _Belfree’s_ with as ingenious and elaborate
_Ringers_ as here in _London_.

I shall begin then with _Peales upon Six Bells_, and herein in order,
measure out the Delights on _Peals_ from _Six_ to _Eight_ Bells, and
setting out early, present you with


  _The Morning Exercise._

_Doubles_ and _Singles_. The whole _Hunt_ is the _Treble_, which
_Hunteth_ up into the _Second_, _Third_, and _Fourth_ places, lying
twice in each; and then lyeth still in the _Sixth_ place, having dodged
behind, and makes another, and then _Hunts_ down as it _Hunted_ up, and
then leads four times. Observing the manner of its Pricking, and its
Practice, may excuse any further defining it.

  123456
  ------
  213465
  213456
  231465
  231456
  234165
  234156
  243516
  243561
  245316
  245361
  254631
  254613
  256431
  256413
  265143
  265134
  261543  [printed as: 265143]
  261534
  216543
  216534
  126543
  126534
  162543
  162534
  ------
  164352
  164325
  _bob._
  163452
  163425
  ------
  165243
  165234
  156243
  156234
  ------
  154326
  154362
  _bob._
  153426
  153462
  ------
  152643
  152634
  125643
  125634
  ------
  124365
  124356
  142365
  142356
  ------
  146532
  146523
  _bob._
  145632
  145623
  ------
  143265
  143256
  134265
  134256
  ------
  136524
  136542
  _bob._
  135624
  135642
  ------
  132465
  132456
  123465
  123456
  ------

This will go a 120 _Changes_, and by making _Bobs_, 240, 360, 720.


  _A Cure for _Melancholy_._
  _Doubles_ and _Singles_.

I should think it needless to explain the method of prick’d Peales, and
give a large Definition of them, when their plain Demonstration might be
sufficient; However, as the Old _Phrase_ is, _Because ’tis usual_,
something shall be said of this too.

The _Treble_ is the whole _Hunt_, as in the former, and leads four
times, and lyeth behind as many, and twice in every other place; the two
_Bells_ in the 3d. add 4th. places continue dodging, when the _Treble_
moves out of the 4th. place; untill it comes down there again, and then
the two hindmost dodge, till the _Treble_ displaceth them; who maketh
every double _Change_, except when it lieth behind, and then the double
is on the four first, and on the four last when it leads. Every Single
(except when the _Treble_ lies there) is in the 5th. and 6th. places;
or if possessed by the _Treble_, then in the 3d. and 4th. places: Every
_Bell_ (except the _Treble_) lies four times in the Second place: But
enough; a word is enough to the Wise. See it here Deciphered.

  123456
  ------
  213465
  213456
  231465
  231456
  234165
  234156
  243516
  245316
  243561
  245361
  423561
  425361
  423516
  425316
  452136
  452163
  451236
  451263
  415236
  415263
  145236
  145263
  142536
  142563
  ------
  156423
  156432
  _bob._
  165423
  165432
  ------
  143652
  143625
  _bob._
  134652
  134625
  ------
  162345
  162354
  163245
  163254
  ------
  125634
  125643
  126534
  126543
  ------
  154263
  154236
  152463
  152436
  ------
  143526
  143562
  _bob._
  134526
  134562
  ------
  156423
  156432
  _bob._
  165423
  165432
  ------
  132654
  132645
  136254
  136245
  ------
  124365
  124356
  123465
  123456
  ------

This will go _Six-score Changes_, but by making _bobs_, it will go 240,
360, or 720. The _bob_ is a double _Change_ at the leading of the
_Treble_, in which the _Bell_ in the 4th Place lyeth still.


  London Nightingale,
  _Doubles_ and _Singles_.

The Whole-_Hunt_ is the _Treble_, who lyeth four times before, and as
many behind, and twice in every other place: The two hind _bells_
continue dodging, when the _Treble_ moves down out of the _Fifth_ place,
till he comes there again, the _bell_ in the _Fourth_ place lying still
all the while: When the two hind _bells_ aforesaid leave dodging, then
the two _First bells_ take their dodging places, till dispossessed
again, by the return of the said Hind _bells_ to their dodging; and then
they Cease.

  123456
  ------
  213465
  213456
  231465
  231456
  234165
  234156
  243516
  423516
  243561
  423561
  245361
  425361
  245316
  425316
  452136
  452163
  451236
  451263
  415236
  415263
  145236
  145263
  154236
  154263
  ------
  126543
  126534
  162543
  162534
  ------
  153624
  153642
  _bob._
  156324
  156342
  ------
  134562
  134526
  _bob._
  135462
  135426
  ------
  142356
  142365
  124356
  124365
  ------
  136245
  136254
  163245
  163254
  ------
  125634
  125643
  152634
  152643  [printed as: 152634]
  ------
  164523
  164532
  _bob._
  165423
  165432
  ------
  143652
  143625
  _bob._
  146352
  146325
  ------
  132465
  132456
  123465
  123456
  ------

This will go 120, and by making _bobs_, 240, 360, or 720.


  _Colledge Bobs._

In this _bob_, when the _Treble_ leaves the two Hind _bells_, they dodge
till it comes there again, and till the _Treble_ gives way for the
dodging again of the said two Hind _bells_, the two _First bells_ dodge,
but after Cease dodging, when the two Hind _bells_ dodge.

  123456
  ------
  214365
  124356
  213465
  231456
  324165
  321456
  234165
  243615
  426351
  246315
  423651
  246351
  423615
  243651
  426315
  462135
  641253
  642135
  461253
  416235
  142653
  412635
  146253
  142635
  416253
  146235
  412653
  421635
  246153
  241635
  426153
  462513
  _&c._
  165432
  _bob._
  156423
  ------
  143526
  _bob._
  134562
  ------
  152364
  153246
  ------
  126543
  125634
  ------
  164235
  162453
  ------
  143652
  _bob._
  134625
  ------
  165324
  _bob._
  156342
  ------
  132546
  135264
  ------
  124365
  123456
  ------


  _Another._

Here, every _bell_, when it comes to lead, makes a dodge before, then
after one _Change_, it lyeth still; after it has made another dodge,
it moves up into the _4th._ place, where twice it lyeth still; and down
again; except the _Treble_ happens to dodge with it in the _4th._ place,
then it _Hunts_ up behind. When the _Treble_ moves down out of the _3d._
place, the two _bells_ in the _3d._ and _4th._ place continue there,
till the _Treble_ comes up thither again, the two hind _bells_ dodging
in the mean time.

  123456
  ------
  214365
  124356
  213465
  231645
  326154
  231654
  326145
  362415
  634251
  364215
  632451
  623541
  265314
  625341
  263514
  236154
  321645
  236145
  321654
  312564
  135246
  315264
  132546
  135264
  312546
  132564
  315246
  351426
  534162
  351462
  534126
  _&c._
  153624
  _bob._
  135642
  ------
  153462
  _bob._
  135426
  ------
  153246
  152364
  ------
  125634
  126543
  ------
  162453
  164235
  ------
  146325
  _bob._
  164352
  ------
  146532
  _bob._
  164523
  ------
  146253
  142635
  ------
  124365
  123456
  ------

Both these _bobs_ will go _One Hundred_ and _Twenty Changes_, and by
making of _bobs_, they will go, 240, 360, or 720. And thus with little
Variation, there are other _bobs_ may be made after the same manner, and
afford as Admirable Musick, as possibly can be made on _bells_. I shall
therefore hasten to finish this dayes Work, only first present you with
this one more called,


  The City Delight:
  _Doubles_ and _Singles_.

The whole _Hunt_ is the _Treble_, and lieth as before in the
_Nightingale_: When the _Treble_ moves out of the _3d._ place, the
_Singles_ are made in the _2d._ and _3d._ places, till the _Treble_
repossesses his _3d_ place, and then behind, till it moves up again out
of the _3d._ place. The two Hind _bells_ dodge, when the _Treble_ moves
out of the _4th._ place, till he returns again; the _bell_ in the _4th._
place lying still all the while.

  123456
  ------
  213465
  213456
  231465
  231456
  234165
  234156
  243156
  234615
  243615
  246351
  264351
  246531
  264351
  265413
  256413
  265143
  256143
  251634
  251643
  215634
  215643
  125634
  125643
  152634
  152643
  ------
  154326
  154362
  _bob._
  153426
  153462
  ------
  156234
  156243
  165234
  165243
  ------
  164352
  164325
  _bob._
  163452
  163425
  ------
  162534
  162543
  126534
  126543
  ------
  124365
  124356
  142365
  142356
  ------
  145623
  145632
  _bob._
  146523
  146532
  ------
  143265
  143256
  134265
  134256
  ------
  135642
  135624
  _bob._
  136542
  136524
  ------
  132465
  132456
  123465
  123456
  ------

This will go as many _Changes_ as the last mentioned, by making _bobs_.
And here I will shut up this dayes Peal, upon Six Bells with


  The Evening Delight.
  _Doubles_ and _Singles_.

The Whole-_Hunt_ is the _Treble_, and lyes as before specified, with
this exception only: That it dodges in the _2d._ and _3d._ places, every
time it _Hunts_ up, and down. Observe when _Treble_ goes to lead, and
leaves of leading, the _bells_ in the _3d._ and _4th._ places lye still,
_&c._ Note the pricking this _Peal_.

  123456
  ------
  213465
  231465
  213645
  231645
  236154
  263154
  236514
  263514
  265314
  256341
  265431
  256431
  254613
  245613
  254163
  245163
  241536
  214536
  241356
  214356
  124365
  142365
  124635
  142635
  ------
  146253
  164235
  _bob._
  146253
  164235
  ------
  162453
  126453
  _bob._
  162435
  126435
  ------
  124653
  142653
  124563
  142563
  ------
  145236
  154236
  145326
  154326
  ------
  153462
  135462
  153642
  135642
  ------
  136524
  163524
  _bob._
  136542
  163542
  ------
  165324
  156324
  _bob._
  165342
  156342
  ------
  153624
  135624
  153264
  135264
  ------
  132546
  123546
  132456
  123456
  ------

This Peal will go 120 _Changes_, and by making _bobs_, as many as above.

Note that in all the foregoing Peals upon _Six bells_, the _bobs_ are
double _Changes_, and made alwayes at the leadings of the _Whole-Hunt_.
He that Rings the _Half-Hunt_, may best call _bob_ in all Peales.


I come now to the _Changes_ upon Seven _bells_, which though the seldom
Practice of them might excuse my omitting them; yet because I promised
to say somewhat of them, I shall be as good as my Word, (the Character
of an Honest man) and present you with a couple of Examples, and then
proceed to _Peales_ upon _Eight_: But this I must crave leave to
premise, That Variety of _Changes_ may be prick’d upon Seven _bells_, as
_Triples_, and _Doubles_, _Triples Doubles_, and _Single Doubles_, &c.
and the same Methods may be prick’d upon _Seven_, as may be upon _Five_,
the true difference of Proportion being observed; but to proceed.


  _Dodging Triples._

_Triples_ and _Doubles_, and indeed all _Peals_ upon Six, may likewise
go upon Seven _Bells_, thus,

  1234567
  -------
  2143576
  2415367
  4251376
  4523167
  5432617
  4523671
  5432761
  4523716
  5432176
  5341267
  3514276
  3152467
  1325476
  1352746


  Plain Triples.

  1234567
  -------
  2143657
  2416375
  4261735
  4627153
  6472513
  6745231
  7654321
  7563412
  5736142
  5371624
  3517264
  3152746
  1325476

In this all the Bells have a Hunting _Course_.


  _Colledge Triples_, dodging before, and behind.

  1234567
  -------
  2143576
  2415367  [printed as: 2415357]
  4251376
  2453167
  4235617
  2436571
  4263751
  2467315
  4276135
  2471653
  4217635
  4126753
  1462735
  1467253
  4176235
  4712653
  7421635
  4726153
  7462513
  4765231

This _Peal_ thus prick’t, will go, 84 _Changes_, and the _Treble_
leading, and the _Half Hunt_ lying next it, and a parting _Change_
(which is a _Double_ on the four middlemost of the Six hind _Bells_)
being made, it will go 420, and by making _bobs_, 5040.

Thus much shall suffice for _Peales_ upon Seven _Bells_, I proceed to
_Changes_ upon _Eight_.


  _Peals of Eight Bells._

Without amusing our selves with what Notes are most _Musical_, to _lye
behind_, we will come to the matter of Fact; for those Methods of
_Peals_ that are prick’t on _Six_, may be the same upon _Eight_,
Observing only, that _Triples_ and _Doubles_ upon _Six_, must be
_Quadruples_, and _Triples_ upon _Eight_. _Doubles_ upon _Six_, must be
_Triples_ upon _Eight_, &c. Now then to our purpose of Demonstration;
We generally give preference to things, as they are dignified with some
eminent Title, and are ready to suppose they may have something more
than ordinary, that merits such Esteem, whereof the Title is but a Sign,
or Token; which Custome induced me to head my Discourse upon _Changes_
on _Eight Bells_, with that which carries the most _Swelling_ Title.


  The Imperial Bob:
  _Quadruples_ and _Triples_.

The _Treble_ hath a dodging _Course_, the two first, and two last
_Bells_ always dodge, till hindred by the _Treble_, the two next to
these, lying still one _Change_, dodge the next, till the _Treble_
hinders them too. Those in the 5th. and 6th. places dodge (the Treble
being behind) and those in the 3d. and 4th. places likewise dodge (the
Treble being before) and so till hindered by the Treble.

  12345678
  --------
  21436587
  12346578
  21436587
  24136578
  42315687
  24135678
  42316587
  24361578
  42635187
  24631578
  42365187
  24635817
  42368571
  24365817
  42638571
  24365871
  42638517
  24635871
  42368517
  24638157
  42361875
  24368157
  42631875
  24613857
  42168375
  24618357
  42163857
  41268357
  14623875
  41263857
  14628375
  14263857
  41628375
  14268357
  41623875
  46128357
  64213875
  46123857
  64218375
  46281357
  _&c._
  16847253
  16482735
  --------
  18765432
  _bob._
  17864523
  --------
  16573824
  _bob._
  15678342
  --------
  17352648
  17536284
  --------
  13274586
  13725468
  --------
  12438765
  12347856
  --------
  14826357
  14283675
  --------
  18645273
  18462537
  --------
  16587432
  _bob._
  15684732
  --------
  18753624
  _bob._
  17856342
  --------
  15372846
  15738264
  --------
  13254768
  13527486
  --------
  12436587
  12345678
  --------

By this method, the Peal will go 224 Changes, and by making of Bobs it
will go 448, 672, 1344. The Bob is a _Triple_ Change at the Leading of
the Treble, wherein the Bell in the _Fourth_ place lies still.


The next that comes to our Observation, and answers to what we first
hinted at in the beginning of this discourse of Peals upon _Eight_ Bells
I mean _Precedency in Title_, is the


  Bob Major.
  _Plain Quadruples_ and _Triples_.

In this all the _Bells_ have a direct _Hunting Course_, until the Treble
leads, and then the six hindmost _Bells_ dodge.

  12345678
  --------
  21436587
  24163857
  42618375
  46281735
  64827153
  68472513
  86745231
  87654321
  78563412
  75836142
  57381624
  53718264
  35172846
  31527486
  13254768
  31527486

By this method this will go 112. And by making _Bobs_, 224, 336, or 672.
The _Bob_ is a _Triple Change_, as in the foregoing _Imperial_ is
specified. By making two _Extreams_ it will go 1344, and with four
_Extreams_, 2688.

All Peals upon six Bells, wherein half the Changes are _Triples_, will
go upon _Eight_ according the method before-going, thus; If it be a Peal
upon _Six_, consisting of 360, or 720 Changes, then there must be five
_Hunts_ in the Ringing of it upon _Eight_, the Treble being the first,
2 the Second, _&c._


  Colledge Bob Major.
  _Quadruples_ and _Triples_.

There is four wayes of Pricking these. The first hath single Dodging
behind, and is thus Peal’d.


  The First.

  12345678
  --------
  21436587
  24163578
  42615387
  46251378
  64523187
  65432817
  56348271
  53684721
  35867412
  38576142
  83751624
  87315642
  78136524
  71863542
  17685324
  16758342


  The Second.

This hath Single Dodging before and behind, thus prickt.

  12345678
  --------
  21436587
  24163578
  42615387
  24651378
  42563187
  24536817
  42358671
  24385761
  42837516
  24873156
  42781365
  24718356
  42173865
  41237856
  14328765
  13482756


  The Third.

This hath double Dodging behind, thus Prickt.

  12345678
  --------
  21436587
  24135678
  42316587
  43261578
  34625187
  36452817
  63548271
  65384721
  56837412
  58673142
  85761324
  87216342
  78153624
  71856342
  17583624
  15786342


  The Fourth.

This hath double Dodging before and behind both thus.

  12345678
  --------
  21436587
  24135678
  42316587
  24361578
  42635187
  24365817
  42638571
  24368751
  42637815
  24367185
  42631758
  24613785
  42167358
  41263785
  14627358
  16423785

These may be prick’t several other wayes, but that I Omit here for
Brevities sake; The _Dodging_ is without Intermission, except an
hinderance comes by the _Treble_; as likewise between two Bells, until
_Treble_ parts the Fray. The _Bobs_ are _Triple Changes_, as the
_Treble_ leads; in the _1st._ _2d._ and _6th._ the Bell in the _4th._
place lies still at the _Bobs_, and in the _3d._ _4th._ and _5th._ that
in the _2d._ place lies still.

Each of these will go 112 Changes, and by making Bobs 224, 336, or 672.


  Colledge Triples Dodging both before and behind.

This Peal is the same for _Bobs_, as the _Bob Major_, and will go as
many Changes by making Bobs, or otherwise, as any of the foregoing Four,
and is thus Peal’d.

  12345678
  --------
  21436587
  24153678
  42513687
  24531678
  42536187
  24563817
  42568371
  24586731
  42587613
  24578163
  42571836
  24517863
  42157836
  41275863
  14725836
  17452863


  The Wild-Goose Chace
  _Triples._

The Explanation shall follow the Peal; intending here to put an end to
my _Epitome_ of the _Art of Ringing_, and therefore shall first present
you with this Prick’t thus.

  12345678
  --------
  21536784
  25163748
  52613784
  56231748
  65327184
  63572814
  36758241
  37625481
  73265418
  72356148
  27531684
  25713648
  52173684
  51237648
  15327684
  13572648
  31752684
  37125648
  73215684
  72351648

In this Change the 4th. Bell must first hunt up into the Sevenths place,
and then the 4 and 8 alwayes dodge behind throughout the Peal, unless
when obstructed by the _Treble_. The Bell that moves up into the 6th.
place, when the _Treble_ moves thence down, lies still there, till
displaced by the _Treble_; during which time the two hind Bells dodge,
and the _five first_ go a perfect _Hunting-Course_: And when likewise
the _Treble_ moveth out the 5th. place the five first Bells go a
_Hunting-Course_, till it comes down there again: By this method it will
go 80 Changes, and by _Bobs_ 160, 240, or 480. The _Bob_ is made as in
the foregoing Changes.

And here I thought to make an end of the Art of Ringing, but _Cynthius
aurem vellit_, the young Practitioner, whose only Information is hereby
aimed at, plucks me by the Sleeve, and tells me in the Ear, That tho
Peals upon six, as _Triples_ and _Doubles_, &c. make excellent Musick
upon Eight _Bells_, 4 8, 6 8, 4 1, or 1 8 lying behind: Or, _Triples_
and _Doubles_ upon the six middle _Bells_, the _Tennor_ lying behind;
yet for him who is not arrived to such a perfection of Skill, at to Ring
these compleat Peals, the most proper and easy for him are
_Set-Changes_, which are founded on these _Grounds_.

First, _Placing the Bells Fifths_; thus: The 4 must hunt up behind
the 7, the 3, behind the 6, and the 2 behind the 5; Or the one may hunt
down under the other, as the 5 under the 2, the 6 under 3, and 7
under 4: Or if you will, first let a _Single_, next a _Double_, and then
a _Triple_ Change be made on the Middle _Bells_, all coming to the same
effect; for then the Changes will lye _Fifths_ thus, 1 5, 2 6, 3 7, 4 8.
In the Peal four _Concords_ are to be regarded, The first 1 5; the
second 2 6. the third 3 7. and the fourth 4 8.

These four _Concords_ may go the Methods of any Changes upon four
_Bells_; 1, 5 being taken for the _Treble_; 2, 6 for the _Second_; 3, 7
for the _Third_; and 4, 8 for the _Fourth_; and the _Concords_ may
Change places with one another, as you list. In which this Observation
is highly necessary, That the two Notes of every Concord must constantly
attend each other in their Motion; that is, whenever one of the two
Notes moves, the other must follow it.

Or Secondly, _Place the Bells_ Thirds; thus: The 6 4 and 2 must hunt up,
or else the 3 5 7 down; or otherwise on the middle most _Bells_ let a
_Triple_, _Double_ or _Single_ Change be made, they are to one effect;
and then the _Bells_ will lie _Thirds_ thus, 1 3. 5 7. 2 4. 6 8. Herein
are four _Concords_ observable; as in the former Peal, _viz_, 1 3. 5 7.
2 4. 6 8. These _Concords_ may go the Methods of any Changes upon Four
_Bells_, 1, 3 being taken for the Treble; 5, 7 for the Second; 2, 4 for
the third; and 6, 8 for the fourth; moving in the same manner as before
shewed.

By these _Grounds_ Variety of excellent & Musical Changes are to be
Rung; _Any Concord may be made a Hunt_, and to move up and down at the
begining.

In Ringing these _Set-Changes_, the Note will lye sometimes _Fifths_,
sometimes _Thirds_, and sometimes _both_, and then to _Clam_ them, is
admirable Musick: Clamming is, when each _Concord_ strike together;
which being done true the 8 will strike as but four _Bells_, & make a
Melodious Harmony. You may _Clam_ two or three bouts, and then strike as
many times Open, alternatively, one _Clam_ one Pull, and Open the next,
_&c._

Thus much shall suffice for my treating of Ringing, and had not the
Variety of its _Theme_, in which I was insensibly engaged, invited my
Tast of something of every thing: I had not enlarged so much as I have;
but I hope the pleasure it may produce, will attone for my dilating on
so delightful a Subject; All I have therefore to add is, some _Advice_
to the _Ringer_, in the Lawfull prosecuting this _Recreation_; and that
is this.

When God in _Israels Exodus_ out of _Egypt_, commanded _Moses_ to
Consecrate _Aaron_, and his Sons, and invest them with those
_Pontificial_ Vestments, according to the Pattern God had cut out, it is
observable, that the _Robe_ of the _Ephod_, was with a particular
Circumstance of Beauty to be Adorned, by hanging the _Hem_ of it with
_Golden Bells_, and _Pomegranates_, each placed in an orderly Position,
one by another round: This was the first institution we can read of, for
the Use _Bells_ in Sacred Offices; but the reason was this: Because in
_Aarons_ Ministration before God, when he entered into the Holy Place,
and when he came out, the Sound of the _Bells_ might be heard in the
_Temple_, for a _Memorial_ to the Children of his People. This Use of
Bells continue in the _Aaronical_ Order, to this day. From hence the
_Christian Church_ likewise (of which the Church under the _Mosaic_
Dispensation was but a _Type_) has made Use of _Bells_, for the
notifying the Time when the People are to Assemble, and made a Signal
for convocating them together to the _Temple_; and herein differing from
the _Mahometans_, in the _Steeples_ of whose _Temples_, are never found
any _Bells_, but _Cryers_, Persons who with a loud Voyce call them to
Prayers.

Now then let us make this Use of the Institution of _Bells_. _First_,
Let not only the _Musick_ and _Delight_ the _Bells_ give thee, invite
thee to come to the _Temple_, to be partaker of that Pleasure they may
afford thy Body, but let their _Musick_ invite thee to come thither when
they call thee, to exercise thy Soul in Devotion; to God. Do not let thy
frequent coming thither on _Week-days_ for thy Diversion, make thee
absent thy self on _Sundays_ from thy Devotion; but let their Original
Use make thee mindful of the _Sanctum Sanctorum_, the most Holy Place.
Do not let the _Sunday_ Mornings Peal engage thy presence then, and the
_Ale-House_ have thy company afterwards. Be as quick in hearing the
_Chyming_ for _Prayers_, as thou art in the _Notes_ for _Pleasure_.

  _When ere the _Old-Exchange_ of Profit Rings,
  Her Silver _Saints-Bell_, of uncertain Gains,
  Thy Merchant-soul can stretch both _Legs & Wings_,
  How canst thou run, and take unwearied Pains?_

And shouldst thou not be as nimble, when the _Saints-bell_ of the Church
sounds in thy Ears, and calls thee to attend the _Priest_, who now
signifyes his entrance into the _Holy-place_, and invites thee to joyn
with him in the Sacrifice of Prayers and Praises.

_Secondly_, Nor let the Bells be made thy Lullaby, to drown some
Dissatisfaction, and so makes thee repair to the _Belfree_, (like the
_Nurse_ to her _Whistle-Bells_) to quiet thy disturbed mind, and thus
(as the Divine Poet excellently expresses it) to silence it with

  Look, Look, What’s here! A dainty Golden thing?
  See how the dancing _Bells_ turn round, and Ring
  To please my _Bantling_! here’s a _Knack_ will breed,
  An hundred Kisses; here’s a _Knack_ indeed, _&c._

But let the _Altar_ have thy presence in Communion with God, in Prayers
for his Grace, and Patience, to support any Calamity that may fall upon
thee.

_Lastly_, Let the Bells put you in mind to contemplate on _Death_, and
every time you Ring, think how long it may be ere one of these may be
your turn to have to sound

  _The Nine sad Knolls of a Dull _Passing-Bell_,
  With the loud Language of a Nightly Knell._

This in short, is the use the _Ringer_ ought to make of this his
Recreation, which if he makes duly and rightly, he may then Lawfully
enjoy all the Benefit he can desire from it. And here I shall make an
end of this Observation by way of Advice to the _Ringer_, which perhaps
coming amongst Recreations may look unseasonable; But I know (at least
presume) if I meet with an ingenious Reader, I shall need no Apology,
for playing the Divine, in the directing the good Use of our Pleasures,
and aiming at the furtherance of Virtue in all our Actions.

Thus much for _Ringing_.




Of Billiards,


_Italy_ is asserted by universal Consent, to have been the Country
whence this Recreation took its Birth and Original; and indeed ’tis no
wonder that she who is called the _Queen_ or _Empress of the World_, the
_Mistress of the Nations_, nay _the Paradise of the World_, should yield
such Art and Ingenuity, and gentile Cunning, as her proper Product:
A Country whose Inhabitants for their _Gravity_, _Respectiveness_, and
_Ingenuity_ will ever stand Chronicled in the Books of Fame. A People
that are _obedient_ to their _Superiors_, _Courteous_ to their
Inferiors, full of all _Civility_ to their Equals, _Affable_ to
Strangers, and most desirous by all fair and friendly Offices to win
their Love. In their _Apparel_ fine and modest, in their _Furniture_ of
their Houses sumptuous, and at their _Tables_ neat, sober in _Speech_,
Enemies of all _ill Reports_ of others, and so tender of their own
_Reputation_, that whosoever Slanders any one, and it reach the Parties
Ear, the Slanderer certainly dies for it: _Thrifty_ they are generally
of their Money and Expence, and love no more Cost, than what they are
sure to Save by, or have great Thanks for; but otherwise for civil
Behaviour and Deportment, surpassing all the Gentry of the World
besides. But one thing I dare not omit in this Character of them, _viz._
That they are extream _Jealous of their Wives_; and indeed not without
some reason, if what is spoken proverbially of their Women, be true,
That they are as _Magpies_ at the door, _Saints_ in the Church, _Goats_
in the Garden, _Devils_ in the House, _Angels_ in the Streets, and
_Syrens_ at the Windows; if Nature does not make them appear Beautiful,
Art shall, as Paintings and other sophistical Helps; whence comes this
Proverb among them, If _God make them tall and Fat_ (a _goodly_ Woman
being a Title of great Value among them) _they will make themselves
fair_. In fine, The Gentry are very Rich, live of all Men the most
careless and contented Lives, keeping the Poor as Drudges and Slaves for
them; and as it is said of the Tyrant _Polycrates_, _Have nothing to
trouble them, but that they are troubled with nothing_.

Thus I have given you a brief Character of the Inventors of this
Recreation we are coming to treat of, and hence we may presume, how
_fit_ such a People as this is, to give Birth to such a Recreation, so
Gentile, so Cleanly, and so Ingenious, that as their Persons and Manners
are emulously esteemed, so are their Pastimes ambitiously pursued, by
most Nations in _Europe_; and this Sport is hugely valued by all in
general, few Noblemen’s or private Gentlemen’s Families, nor few noted
Towns in _England_, but have _Billiard Tables_, and admire the
Excellency of it, both for the Exercise of the Body, and the Recreation
of the Mind. But to the Matter in hand.

_First_ then, He that would rightly understand this excellent Pastime,
must be very careful of the _Form_ and _Make of the Table_, and the
right ordering, framing, and fitting it for the Game, which is known by
these ensuing Marks.

1. The _Form_ of a _Billiard Table_ ought to be _Oblong_, that is to
say, somewhat longer than it is broad; Both the length and breadth being
left to your Discretion to make; proportionable to the Room you design
it for; It ought to be _railed_ round, and this Rail or Ledge a little
swelled or stufft with fine Flox or Cotton, that may yield to the Ball
when struck against it, and expedites rather than deads the Flight of
the Ball; though that happens according to the Violence of the Stroke or
Push: The _Superficies_ of the Table ought to be covered with Green fine
Cloath, clean and free from Knots: The Board must be levelled as exactly
as is possible for the Eye and Hand of the most curious Joyner to Level,
to the end your Ball may run true upon any part of the Table, without
leaning or declining to any side of it: I must confess I do believe
there are few have been so careful in this last thing, as they ought,
because they have not timely foreseen, if the Boards, whereof the Table
is made, be _well-seasoned_, and not subject to _Warp_, and that the
_Floor_ whereon it stands be even and level; so that through the
Ill-seasonedness of the one, or Unevennes of the other, as likewise in
time by the weight of the Table, and the Gamesters yielding and giving
way, there are very few found true. And indeed without a Table be
exactly true, a good Gamester can never shew the Excellency of his Skill
and Art, but a very Bungler sometimes, by being well acquainted with the
Turnings and Windings of a false Table, may beat a good Gamester with
great vexation and shame, who otherwise would have given him any odds
whatsoever. Therefore let me tell you, it will conduce as much to the
Interest of the Master of the House, where a _Billiard Table_ is kept,
to see that it be well and truly levelled and kept, as it does to the
Pleasure and satisfaction of a good Gamester, whose Skill is best seen
and exhibited on such Tables, and never comes unattended with Company
and Profit to the House, by his Recommendation he gives abroad of it.
And now let us proceed to the rest of its parts, and fit it for our
Play; and then let’s to’t as you list.

2. The four Corners of the Table must be furnished with _four Holes_,
and exactly in the middle of each side _one Hole_, and these Holes must
be hung at the bottoms with _Nets_, Which Holes are named _Hazards_,
because if either by Skill or Chance one Gamester strikes anothers Ball
into these Holes, or Hazards, as we will now call them, he wins One; the
_Nets_ are made to receive the Ball, and keep them from falling to the
Ground when hazarded; and indeed is a very commendable way, far better
than _Wooden_ Boxes which some use, these being apt to let a Ball to fly
out again, when they are struck in by a stiff stroke, whereas the Nets
keep them safe, and makes it impossible for them to rebound.

_3dly._ The other _Utensils_ and _Instruments_ belonging to this first
part of our Observations of the _Billiard Table_, are 1. An _Ivory
Port_, this must be placed at one end of the Table. 2. An _Ivory King_,
which must stand at the other end. 3. Two _Ivory Balls_, which must be
compleatly round, or no good proof of your Play can be expected. 4. and
Lastly, _Two Sticks_ made of _Brasile_, _Lignum-Vitæ_, or some other
weighty Wood, to make them heavy, and at the broad end tipt with Ivory:
And be sure to observe narrowly, if the _Heads_ be tight and fast, for
if they should be loose you will never strike a smart stroke; and
therefore if you fear this Defect, see if your stroke be hollow and
dead, and your Ball run faintly, these are infallible Tokens that your
Play will come to nothing without a fresh supply of other Sticks, or the
heads of these fixt.

Thus much for the Table, and all the other Implements belonging to it,
which are necessary for our first Enquiry for the right understanding of
this Game, I come next to those _Rules_ and _Measures_ which are to be
observed for the rendring one a Gamester at this gentile Game.

_Secondly_, This Game in its _Number_ is, according to the _Place_ and
_Time_, when and where it is play’d; for in Gentlemens Houses they do
not oblige themselves to a certain Number, but make as many as they
please to admit up without any Restriction: But in Houses where part of
their Subsistence has a Dependance upon a _Billiard Table_, the Game is
_Five_ by Day-light or _Seven_, if odds be given, and _Three_ by
Candle-light, or more, as the Rule of the House is. Now then having
agreed upon what number we play, let us learn next how to manage our
Game skillfully and with Art, and this we may understand by these
following Rules.

1. Let us know who must lead, which thus is resolved: You must stand on
the one side of the Table opposite to the (so called) King, with your
Ball laid near the Cushion, and your Adversary on the other placed in
the like posture; and thus He of the two, that comes nearest the King,
leads first.

_2ly._ Having gotten the Lead, have a Care how you strike your Ball,
that at the first stroke you touch not with your Ball the end of the
Table, leading from the King to the Port, for if you touch it you lose
One, as you shall observe hereafter in the Orders. But after the first
Stroke you need not fear doing it: And you Leader be sure to lead so,
that you may be in a possibility of passing the Port the next Stroke; or
else to lye so cunningly, that you may probably hazard your Adversaries
Ball the very Stroke you play after him.

_3ly._ Generally the first Contest is who shall _pass first the Port_,
and herein much Pains is taken, and all the Art and Cunning possible
used to do it, and sometimes, nay frequently, an Opportunity of a
_Hazard_ ends the Controversy: Sundry and various, as well as very
pleasant, are the Policies and Tricks which are here used to obstruct
each others Pass, as; _By turning the Port by a strong clever stroke_
(the Sticks turning it, it is nothing, but to set aright again is the
amends, though some would have the severity of the Orders inflicted on
such an Offence by the Loss of One:) Next by _laying your Ball_ (when
you see it impossible to pass) _in the Port_, or _before your
Adversaries Ball_, for then let him do his utmost, he must Pass after
you; if he has Past first, and you dare not venture to follow him, as
fearing he should in the mean time touch the King, and so carry away the
End; then you must wait upon him, and watch every Opportunity how you
may hazard, or king him: Kinging of him is, when his Ball lyes in so
advantageous a manner, as that if you strike his Ball, he must
inevitably strike down the King, then you win, and prevent the Loss of
that End: But with this Caution however, That you be careful how you
strike, for if you do king him, and your Ball happens to fly over the
Table, or into a Hazard, you shall lose One notwithstanding you have
King’d him; and therefore a skillful Precaution must ever be had in
this, and he that would prevent any such Chance, must

_4ly._ Have a _curious Eye_, and a _good Judgment_, to take and quarter
just so much of the Ball, that when he intends either to King or Hazard
his Adversaries Ball, he may with Facility & Dexterity effect either.
Which Observation must be noted, in passing on your Antagonists Ball, or
corner of the Port: And indeed some are curious Effectors of this part
of the Recreation, who with less than a fifth part of a Ball, will
rarely miss a King or Hazard; which I must confess is an excellent part
of a compleat Gamester in this Sport.

_5ly._ Be careful that you _lay not your hand on the Table_ when you
strike, nor let your Sleeve drag upon it, if you do it is a Loss; Or if
you _smoke a Pipe of Spanish or Virginia_, being so wedded to that Fume,
that were you sure to smother all the rest of the Company you are
insensible of the Indecency, be careful that the Ashes fall not on the
Table, lest the Cloth be burnt, which many times falls out: In these two
Cases, let the Mulcts and Forfeitures of both, but especially the
Hinderance the last gives a Man in the Skillful managing his Game, deter
you from the lolling slovenly Posture of the first, and the stinking
Indecency of the latter; because this Pastime being of a neat and
cleanly Composition, will not admit any such Irregularities and
Indecorums, without an absolute Violation of its Laws, and a Punishment
attending such unhandsome Offences.

_6thly._ As this cleanly Pastime exacts our diligent Care of keeping a
_Decorum_, in the prosecuting the same, so does it require that we
handle our Instruments with a neat and tractable hand, dislikes a
Clumsey-Fist, which palms the Stick, as if he were handling a
_Plough-share_: And therefore when you strike a long stroak, hold your
stick neatly between your two fore-Fingers and your Thumb, and then
strike a smart stroak; and by taking a steady and right Aim, (in this
having your Eye and Judgment about you) you may when you list, either
fetch back your Adversaries Ball, when he lyes fair for a Pass; or many
times, when he lyes behind the _King_, and you at the other end of the
Table, you may by a dextrous management of your stroke, _King_ him
backward: Both which ways, I must confess, require a great deal of Care,
and good Play, which he that would be, or already is, a Gamester, is
never wanting in. But

_7thly_, If you lye close, then the small end of your Stick, or the flat
of the big end, raising up one end over your shoulder, is practicable
and useful, and either of them to be used, as Occasion shall require,
and as you judge most convenient and proper for the working the Effect
you Aim at.

_8thly_, There is one Fault, which tho its Demerits perhaps may not
reach a Forfeiture, yet I must tell you will scarce admit of an Excuse,
though this I presume is regulated according to the Agreement first
stipulated between the Gamesters, and this Fault is called _Raking_,
_i. e._ not striking your Ball cleanly, but gliding along, as it were;
But in this, if you touch your Ball twice, it is a loss; as indeed
repugnant to all _Rule_ and _Method_.

_9thly_, There is another Caution you are to take at the Port, _viz._
When you jobb your Ball with the great end of your stick through the
Port, beware that you throw it not down, the doing of it is a loss; and
therefore be careful to do it so handsomly, that at one stroke without
turning the Port with your stick (which as I have mentioned before is a
fault) you accomplish your Intention: But on the contrary observe

_10thly_, It is good play to turn the Port with your _Ball_, (not with
your stick) and so hinder your Adversary from passing: Nor is it amiss,
to make your Adversary a _Fornicator_ if it lyes in your Power: I mean
to make him a _Fornicator_ is, having past your self a little way, and
your Adversaries ball being hardly through the port, you put him back
again, and it may be quite out of pass, and so you may the sooner
peradventure gain the end, having the Advantage of passing, by gently
thrusting the other back again.

_11thly_, Let Policy likewise be a guide to you, for obtaining the
Conquest, and lying a-loof off, and laying a long Hazard sometimes for
your Antagonist, will be an excellent way to entice and entrap him; for
that he promising to himself the good fortune of Hazarding you, will be
induced rashly to adventure at that distance, and supposing to strike
your Ball, which cunningly lyes (to tempt him to that Venture) near the
Hazard, is himself caught in that Trap he thought to throw you into, by
reason that the distance, deceives his Expectation, and blows up his
thoughts with fruitless Suppositions.

_12thly_, Let Art likewise teach you Cunning, _i. e._ by lying abscond,
or at Bo-peep with your Adversary; this is a subtlety which perhaps may
gain the Advantage of a Pass or Hazard. For I must tell you, in this
Game, is required much Cunning, and subtle Contrivance, as in any
Recreation whatever, and therefore when you are to Play with an Expert
Player, you must muster up all the forces of your Ingenuity and Wit, for
the vanquishing of your Opponent.

_Lastly_, Observe the Advantages may be gained, and endeavour to get
them, if they fall within the sphere of your Activity. One of which I
shall here insert, which is indeed the chief, _viz._ That if your
Adversary hath not past the Port, and lies up by the King, take the
Advantage of a Second Pass, endeavour to pass again, which if you
dextrously perform, and after touch the King, you gain two; but if your
too great Precipitancy and Inadvertency, or sometimes an unlucky Chance
hurryes you on to throw down the King, then you loose.

Some instead of a King use a string and Bell, so that after you have
passed, you need not doubt the end, as being a thing not so ticklish, or
requiring so much Art as the King does, to be toucht finely and gently
at a distance, without throwing it down: This alone is to be preferred
for ingenious Persons, the other for the use only of Bunglers.


Thus much shall suffice for Rules for the right Playing at _Billiards_,
which being a Recreation not Admitting of any further Observations and
Methods to be made and shewn on it; Let Practice, and the Dictates of
the ensuing Orders compleat your Perfection in this gentile Game.


_ORDERS for Players at the Gentile Game of _Billiards_ to Observe._

I.

If the Leader touch the end of the Table with his Ball, at the first
stroke, he loseth One.

II.

If the Follower intend to hit his Adversaries Ball, or pass at one
Stroke, he must string his Ball, that is, Lay it even with the King, or
he loseth One.

III.

He that Passeth through the Port hath the Advantage of touching the
King, which is One, if not thrown down.

IV.

He that passeth twice, his Adversary not having passed at all, and
toucheth the King, without throwing him down, wins two Ends.

V.

He that passeth not hath no other Advantage than the Hazards.

VI.

He that is a Fornicator (that is hath past through the Back of the Port)
he must pass twice thro the fore-part, or he cannot have the Advantage
of passing that end.

VII.

He that hits down the Port, or King, Hazards his own Ball, or strikes
either Ball over the Table, loseth One.

VIII.

He that Hazards his Adversaries Ball, or makes it hit down the King,
winneth the end.

IX.

If four Play, two against two, he that mistakes his stroke loseth one to
that side he is of.

X.

He that after both Balls plaid, removes the Port without consent, or
strikes his Ball twice together, or that his Adversaries Ball touch his
stick, hand, or Clothes, or playeth his Adversaries Balls, loseth One.

XI.

He that sets not one foot upon the Ground, when he strikes his Ball
shall lose an end, or if he layes his hand or Sleeve on the Cloth.

XII.

A stander-by, tho he betts shall not instruct, or speak in the Game
without Consent, or being first asked; If after he is Advertised hereof
he Offend in this nature, for every fault he shall instantly forfeit
Two-pence for the good of the Company, or not be suffered to stay in the
Room.

XIII.

He that Playes a Ball, while the other runs, or takes up a Ball before
it lies still, loseth an End.

XIV.

He that removes the Port with his stick, when he strikes his Ball, and
thereby prevents his Adversaries Ball from passing, loseth an end.

XV.

All Controversies are to be decided by the standers-by, upon asking
Judgment.

XVI.

Whosoever breaks the King forfeits a Shilling, for the Port ten
Shillings, and each stick Five Shillings.

XVII.

Five ends make a Game by Day-light, and Three by Candle-light.

Many other Orders there are which concern the House, and thither I refer
you for further Infomation; and here take leave to conclude this my
_School of Recreation_.

  Utrum horum Mavis accipe, _&c._


_FINIS._


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

Some Books Printed for _Henry Rhodes_, near _Bride-Lane_ in
_Fleet-Street_.


The Strange Religions, Customes and Manners of sundry Nations, in
_Twelves_, price bound _One Shilling_.

The History of the Life and Glorious Reign of Queen _Elizabeth_, the 2d.
Edition with Additions, by _S. Clark_ in _Twelves_ bound _One Shilling_.

The History of King _Henry_ the eighth and _Edward_ the sixth,
_Twelves_, Price bound _One Shilling_.

_Coffee-House-Jests_, the third Edition, with Additions, in _Twelves_,
Price bound _One Shilling_.

The present State of _Turky_, _Twelves_, Price bound _One Shilling_.

The _London Jilt_: Or, The _Politick Whore_, in two parts.

_Witts Cabinet_, Twelves, Price bound _One Shilling_.

Sundery Conversations, _Twelves_.

The great Point of Succession, in _Folio_.


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Errors Noted by Transcriber:

In several places the first line of a change-ringing chart was damaged
or missing; since these lines always read “123456” they are not
separately noted. Brackets in the body of the text are in the original.

  _Infirmity_, _Age_, _Station_, _Degree_, may render
    [_“may” printed in emphatic type like preceding words_]
  Give him sharp, as well as gentle, Courses  [“as as well as”]
  a bag of Chaff, and thresh’d Ears  [“aud”]
  a-cross these Paths, hollow,  [“Paths ,ollow,”]
  your Rods about twelve Inches long  [_“a-/about” at line break_]
  To sharpen your _Hook_, carry a little _Whetstone_.
    [_“a / a” at line-break]
  curiously Flourishing their several Orient and bright Colours
    [“Flourishng”]
  without breaking or circling the Water
    [_“the / the” at line-break]
  Oyl of _Aspray_, _Coculus India_, and _Assa Fœtida_  [“Fætida”]
  and skilfully argue and dispute its Excellency, _&c.  [, for .]
  Warm and well lined  [_“and / and” at line-break]
  whose _Lord Mayor_ annually appears   [“annnally”]
  This will go a 120 _Changes_, and by making _Bobs_, 240, 360, 720.
    [_text has “270” for 720_]
  for the Use _Bells_ in Sacred Offices
    [_text unchanged: “the Use of Bells”?_]
  _Colledge Triples_ ... 2415367  [2415357]
  and 4, 8 for the _Fourth_  [“for for”]
  Thus much shall suffice for my treating of Ringing  [“Riging”]
  _i. e._ not striking your Ball cleanly  [“i,e,”]
  The great Point of Succession, in _Folio_.  [, for .]

Invisible letters:

“Invisible” means that the letter does not appear, but there is an
appropriately sized blank space.

  _Names_, _Degrees_, _Ages_, and _Seasons_  [_a of “Seasons”_]
  and the _Lim’d_ straws, lapping under their Wings  [_d of “Lim’d”_]
  seek _where to find_ that he prepared for  [_w of “where”_]
  The _greatest Eels_ lurk under Stones  [_g of “greatest”_]
  At the opening of _Mill-dams_ or _Sluces_  [_l of “Sluces”_]
  lest you make his Limbs sore  [_e of “lest”_]
  the general Method of the whole Peal  [_second e of “general”_]

Period (full stop) missing or invisible:

  _Madness._ Lastly, If your Hound be Mad
  Rub him with a _Brush_ of _Bristles_ over again.
  Chaffinches_, _Goldfinches_, _Yellow-Hammers_, &c.
  with _Gray_, or _White Feathers_.
  render a Practitioner _Excellent_.
  _Secondly_, Learn to apprehend the Places of the _Notes_.

Missing words or letters supplied from 1696 edition, with supplements
shown in {braces}; full lines as printed:

  Thus much for their Names, Degrees{,}
  and Ages: Now let us next obser{ve}
  their _proper Seasons_ for Hunting.
    The _Hart_ or _Buck_, beginneth _fift{een}_
  Days after _Mid-Summer-Day_, and l{ast-}
  eth till _Holy-Rood-Day_.
    The _Fox_, from _Christmass_, and l{ast-}
  eth till the _Annunciation of the bless{ed}
  Virgin Mary_.

  self all over, but his Nose, keeping the
  middle, least by touching any Boughe{s}
  he leave a Scent for the Hounds; And {by}
  his Crossings and Doublings he will e{n-}
  deavour to baffle his Pursuers: In th{ese}
  Cases have regard to your _Old Hou{nds_,}
  as I said before. When he is _Imbost_ {or}
  weary, may be known thus: By {his}
  Creeping into holes, and often lying

  {N}ow for the _Place_ where to find her,
  {you} must examine and observe the Sea-
  {sons} of the Year; for in Summer or
  {Spring} time, you shall find them in
  {Corn-}fields and open places, not sitting
  {in Bushes}, for fear of Snakes, Adders,
  {_&c._} In _Winter_ they love Tuffs of
  {Tho}rns and Brambles, near Houses:
  {In} these places you must regard the _Old-
  ness_ or _Newness_ of her _Forme_ or Seat,

  rected: In any _Cross-Peal_ {the _Whole}
  Hunt_ may move either up or down at

  _Peal{e}s_, as indeed needless; {and my}

  And thus with little Variatio{n, there}

Missing letters stuck to following page:

  them together to inge{n}der in _January_,
  _February_, or _March_, as {the} properest





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The School of Recreation (1684 edition), by 
Robert Howlett

